This Light Novel is darker, have a lot of conspiration, corruption, Collusion, Nepotism, MC and his friend is less Over Power and their opponent (antagonist) reaction toward MC and his subordinate is way blabbing and annoying than the Web Novel Version, the Great Sage is less competence and almighty than in Web Novel thus make the MC more dependable, there's almost never any character development on MC and his subordinate since their personality is cliche and sometime you'll just felt annoyed by MC since he is way too soft hearted.
To ne honest both versions have their pros and cons.
In WN Rimuru started as a bit lowkey and easy going chracter but he took his stand where it was necessary. For example when Dwargon King visited him after he established his nation, first time against Milim, Dont give a f*ck about adventures and he behaves as OP he is. But the story building was rushed too much, like his subordinates started getting too fast paced. They dont get too deep of a development and sometimes some chra haters gets too
ok so you go threw 5 and 3/4 novels reading about the op main character. That is modeled after a pathetic unbelievably naïve child and a all around little b*tch. Thinking good thing I watched the anime. So I don't have to spend the time reading about a saint spewing goodness and holy light. That only wants to spread love threw the world while holding hands. Who the only people that would enjoy reading about. Would be those dumb enough to think that behavior is something only amazing people
Transformers acts as the model-definition framework for state-of-the-art machine learning models in text, computer vision, audio, video, and multimodal model, for both inference and training.

It centralizes the model definition so that this definition is agreed upon across the ecosystem. transformers is the pivot across frameworks: if a model definition is supported, it will be compatible with the majority of training frameworks (Axolotl, Unsloth, DeepSpeed, FSDP, PyTorch-Lightning, …), inference engines (vLLM, SGLang, TGI, …), and adjacent modeling libraries (llama.cpp, mlx, …) which leverage the model definition from transformers.

We pledge to help support new state-of-the-art models and democratize their usage by having their model definition be simple, customizable, and efficient.

There are over 1M+ Transformers model checkpoints on the Hugging Face Hub you can use.

Explore the Hub today to find a model and use Transformers to help you get started right away.

Features
Transformers provides everything you need for inference or training with state-of-the-art pretrained models. Some of the main features include:

Pipeline: Simple and optimized inference class for many machine learning tasks like text generation, image segmentation, automatic speech recognition, document question answering, and more.
Trainer: A comprehensive trainer that supports features such as mixed precision, torch.compile, and FlashAttention for training and distributed training for PyTorch models.
generate: Fast text generation with large language models (LLMs) and vision language models (VLMs), including support for streaming and multiple decoding strategies.
Design

And the first to be given is from the legend of Taliessin.

“In times past (it begins) there lived in Penllyn a man of gentle
lineage, named Tegid Voel, and his dwelling was in the midst of the lake
Tegid, and his wife was called Caridwen. And there was born to him of
his wife a son named Morvran at Tegid, and also a daughter named
Creirwy, the fairest maiden in the world was she; and they had a
brother, the most ill-favoured man in the world, Avagddu. Now Caridwen
his mother thought that he was not likely to be admitted among men of
noble birth by reason of his ugliness, unless he had some exalted merits
or knowledge. For it was in the beginning of Arthur’s time and of the
Round Table.

“So she resolved, according to the arts of the books of Fferyllt, to
boil a cauldron of Inspiration and Science for her son, that his
reception might be honourable, because of his knowledge of the mysteries
of the future state of the world.

“Then she began to boil the cauldron, which, from the beginning of its
boiling, might not cease to boil for a year and a day, until three
blessed drops were obtained of the Grace of Inspiration.

“And she put Gwion Bach, the son of Gwreang of Llanfair in Caereinion in
Powys, to stir the cauldron, and a blind man named Morda to kindle the
fire beneath it, and she charged them that they should not suffer it to
cease boiling for the space of a year and a day. And she herself,
according to the books of the astronomers, and in planetary hours,
gathered every day of all charm-bearing herbs. And one day towards the
end of the year, as Caridwen was culling plants and making incantations,
it chanced that three drops of the charmed liquor flew out of the
cauldron and fell upon the finger of Gwion Bach. And by reason of their
great heat he put his finger to his mouth, and the instant he put these
marvel-working drops into his mouth he foresaw everything that was to
come, and perceived that his chief care must be to guard against the
wiles of Caridwen, for vast was her skill.

“And in very great fear he fled towards his own land, and the cauldron
burst in two, because all the liquor within it, except the three
charm-bearing drops, was poisonous, so that the horses of Gwyddno
Garanhir were poisoned by the water of the stream into which the liquor
of the cauldron ran, and the confluence of that stream was called the
Poison of the Horses of Gwyddno from that time forth.

“Thereupon came in Caridwen, and saw all the toil of the whole year
lost. And she seized a billet of wood and struck the blind Morda on the
head until one of his eyes fell out upon his cheek. And he said,
‘Wrongfully hast thou disfigured me, for I am innocent. Thy loss was not
because of me.’

“‘Thou speakest truth,’ said Caridwen; ‘it was Gwion Bach who robbed
me.’

“And she went forth after him running. And he saw her and changed
himself into a hare and fled.

“But she changed herself into a greyhound, and turned him. And he ran
towards a river and became a fish. And she in the form of an otter-bitch
chased him under the water until he was fain to turn himself into a bird
of the air. She as a hawk followed him, and gave him no rest in the sky,
and just as she was about to stoop upon him, and he was in fear of
death, he espied a heap of winnowed wheat on the floor of a barn, and he
dropped among the wheat and turned himself into one of the grains. Then
she transferred herself into a high-crested black hen, and went to the
wheat and scratched it with her feet, and found him out and swallowed
him, and, as the story says, she bore him nine months, and when she was
delivered of him she could not find it in her heart to kill him, by
reason of his beauty. So she wrapped him in a leathern bag, and cast him
into the sea, to the mercy of God, on the 29th day of April.”

And, Moses-like, was Taliessin afterwards found in the Weir of Gwyddno
by that prince’s only son Elphin, who took him to the house of his
father. Some of the extraordinary tales which this prodigy of a boy told
in verse are given, and it is related how he bewitched the bards of King
Mælgron by pouting out his lips after them, and playing “Blerwm, blerwm”
with his finger upon his lips as they went to court. His own answers to
the king are always in song. Among the curious odes that he sang are
those known as—

                    The Excellence of the Bards.
                    The Reproof of the Bards.
                    The Spite of the Bards.
                    One of the Four Pillars of Song.

This latter begins:—

                       The Almighty made
                       Down the Hebron Vale,
                       With his plastic hands
                           Adam’s fair form.

                       And five hundred years,
                       Void of any help,
                       There he remained and lay
                           Without a soul.

                       He again did form,
                       In calm paradise,
                       From a left side rib,
                           Bliss-throbbing Eve.

                       Seven hours they were
                       The Orchard keeping,
                       Till Satan brought strife
                           With wiles from Hell.

                       Thence were they driven,
                       Cold and shivering,
                       To gain their living
                           Into this world, etc.

Of the story of Kilhwch and Olwen, which has a particularly antique
character, Renan felicitously says that by its entirely primitive
aspect, by the part played in it by the wild boar in conformity to the
spirit of Celtic mythology, by the wholly supernatural and magical
character of the narration, by innumerable allusions, the sense of which
escapes us, it forms a cycle by itself. Passing by the unique adventures
of Kilhwch, he quotes as a typical sample the remarkable passage on the
finding of Mabon, where his followers said unto Arthur, “Lord, go thou
home; thou canst not proceed with thy host in quest of such small
adventures as these,” and Arthur commissions Gwrhyr, because he knew all
languages, and was familiar with those of the birds and the beasts, to
accompany others, whom he named, in search of the lost cousin. They went
forward first to the ousel of Cilgwi, and got its weird and quaint
answer, then to the stag of Redynvre. From him to the owl of Cwm
Cawlwyd, to the eagle of Gwern Abwy, and, lastly, to the salmon of Llyn
Llyw. Each tells its tale, and passes them on to the next. The speeches
of these ancient denizens of the land are very old-fashioned and
curious, typical of all the primitive extravagance of the Celtic
imagination.

But it is in tales like the “Lady of the Fountain” and “Peredur” that we
tap the later, full-blown, and most characteristic Arthurian romance.
The former begins: “King Arthur was at Caerlleon upon Usk; and one day
he sat in his chamber, and with him were Owain, the son of Urien, and
Kynon, the son of Clydno, and Kai, the son of Kyner, and Gwenhwyvar and
her handmaidens at needlework by the window. And if it should be said
that there was a porter at Arthur’s palace, there was none. Glewlwyd
Gavaelvawr was there, acting as porter to welcome guests and strangers,
and to receive them with honour, and to inform them of the manners and
customs of the court; and to direct those who came to the hall or to the
presence chamber, and those who came to take up their lodgings.

“In the centre of the chamber King Arthur sat upon a seat of green
rushes, over which was spread a covering of flame-coloured satin, and a
cushion of red satin was under his elbow. Then Arthur spoke, ‘If I
thought you would not disparage me,’ said he, ‘I would sleep while I
wait for my repast; and you can entertain one another with relating
tales, and can obtain a flagon of mead and some meat from Kai.’ And the
king went to sleep.”

Kynon tells a tale: “I was the only son of my mother and father, and I
was exceedingly aspiring, and my daring was very great. I thought there
was no enterprise in the world too mighty for me, and after I had
achieved all the adventures in my own country, I equipped myself and set
forth to journey through deserts and distant regions. And at length it
chanced that I came to the fairest valley in the world, wherein were
trees of equal growth, and a river ran through the valley, and a path by
the side of the river. And I followed the path until midday, and
continued my journey along the remainder of the valley until the
evening, and at the extremity of the plain I came to a large and
lustrous castle, at the foot of which was a torrent. And I approached
the castle, and there I beheld two youths.”

He describes the wonderful dress of these, and of a man in the prime of
life clad in a robe and a mantle of yellow satin with band of gold lace,
shoes of variegated leather fastened by two bosses of gold. This man
went with him towards the castle. “And there I saw four-and-twenty
damsels,” he says, “embroidering satin at a window. And this I tell
thee, Kai, that the least fair of them was fairer than the fairest maid
thou hast ever beheld in the island of Britain, and the least lovely of
them was more lovely than Gwenhwyvar, the wife of Arthur, when she has
appeared loveliest at the offering on the day of the Nativity or at the
feast of Easter. They rose up at my coming, and six of them took my
horse and divested me of my armour; and six others took my arms and
washed them in a vessel until they were perfectly bright. And the third
six spread cloths upon the table and prepared meat. And the fourth six
took off my soiled garments, and placed others upon me, namely, an under
vest and a doublet of fine linen, and a robe and a surcoat, and a mantle
of yellow satin with a broad gold band upon the mantle, and they placed
cushions both beneath and around me, with coverings of red linen, and I
sat down. Now, the six maidens who had taken my horse unharnessed him as
well as if they had been the best squires in the Island of Britain.
Then, behold, they brought bowls of silver wherein was water to wash,
and towels of linen, some green and some white; and I washed, and in a
little while the man sat down to the table, and I sat down next to him,
and below me sat all the maidens except those who waited on me.”

After he divulged the object of his journey, the host directed him to a
black man of great stature on the top of a mound, ill favoured, with but
one foot, one eye in the middle of his forehead, a club of iron, and a
thousand wild animals grazing around him.

Next day Kynon set out and found this giant. And when I told him, he
says, “who I was and what I sought, he directed me. ‘Take,’ said he,
‘that path that leads towards the head of the glade, and ascend the
wooden steep until thou comest to the summit; and there thou wilt find
an open space like to a large valley, and in the midst of it a tall
tree, whose branches are greener than the greenest pinetrees. Under this
tree is a fountain, and by the side of the fountain a marble slab, and
in the marble slab a silver bowl attached by a chain of silver, so that
it may not be carried away. Take the bowl and throw a bowlful of water
upon the slab, and thou wilt hear a mighty peal of thunder, so that thou
wilt think that heaven and earth are trembling with fury. With the
thunder there will come a shower so severe that it will be scarce
possible for thee to endure it and live. And the shower will be of
hailstones. And after the shower the weather will become fair, but every
leaf that was upon the tree will have been carried away by the shower.
Then a flight of birds will come and alight upon the tree, and in thine
own country thou didst never hear a strain so sweet as that which they
will sing. And at the moment thou art most delighted with the song of
the birds thou wilt hear a murmuring and complaining coming towards thee
along the valley. And thou wilt see a knight upon a coalblack horse,
clothed in black velvet, and with a pennon of black linen upon his
lance; and he will ride unto thee to encounter thee with the utmost
speed. If thou fleest from him he will overtake thee, and if thou
abidest there, as sure as thou art a mounted knight he will leave thee
on foot, and if thou dost not find trouble in that adventure thou
needest not seek it during the rest of thy life.’”

In these tales the principal part belongs to the women, and here it is
the Lady of the Fountain. In reading the romances we instantly find
ourselves on the top wave of chivalry. Three things strike the modern
reader.

First, the ideal here presented of King Arthur and his Queen Gwenhwyvar,
the pure and homely atmosphere of their Court in that wild and barbarian
age, and the sterling qualities and integrity of the Knights of the
Round Table. Each fights not for any national cause, but to show his
personal excellence and satisfy his taste for adventure. It is an epic
creation representing the dream of medieval times.

Second, not less surprising to us is the _sangfroid_ with which the
warriors carry out their adventures, the supreme indifference to danger,
or to the pain and death they inflict when they set to, to try each
other’s mettle. Knight attacks knight for no other reason than that he
is superior in prowess to himself, and he will risk his life any day to
get the mastery over a rival in arms. They reck nothing of sword cuts.
Enough for them that it is in accordance with the laws of chivalry.

Third, and perhaps most wonderful of all, is the delicacy of the
feminine feeling breathed in these romances. There is nothing sensual in
the love here portrayed. It is angelic. Never an impropriety or gross
word is to be met with in all these pages, never a prurient suggestion
for all the roughness of that rude age. Women figure as divine, the most
charming creatures in the world, to protect whose honour and win whose
love and esteem, danger and even death are freely braved. This was a new
element introduced into European literature—the creation of woman’s
character and the place given her in chivalry. “Nearly all the types of
womankind known to the Middle Ages,—Guinevere, Iseult, Enid,”—says
Renan, “are derived from Arthur’s court.”

The influence of these tales upon the literature, the taste, the social
life of the whole of Western Europe has been immense, and they are still
as fresh and enchanting to the intelligent reader as any Arabian Nights’
Entertainment.

Lady Charlotte Guest’s literary monument is for English readers the
standard classic. There we find a charming translation with luminous
notes of these famous Mabinogion, a collection which Renan has called
“the pearl of Gaelic literature, the completest expression of the Cymric
genius,” and for the early Welsh poetry, both in the original and in
translation, we have the sumptuous edition of Dr. Skene, culled from
_The Four Ancient Books of Wales_, to delight us. The poetry and romance
of the Cymry are really two literatures essentially distinct from each
other. Springing from the same soil, each reflects in its own way the
same national character which had so much in common with that of our own
ancient Gaelic ancestry, so that we feel to-day with regard to that long
past, that “distance only lends enchantment to the view.”




                              CHAPTER XIII
                        CELTIC LITERARY REVIVALS

  Sixth century awakening throughout Celtdom—Illustrious
      names—Brittany’s wonderful cycle of song—Charming examples—Dearth
      of tenth century—A strange trait of Celtic life—The brilliant
      medieval renaissance—Output of Ireland, Wales, and Brittany—The
      Cornish dramas—Last speaker of that dialect—Period of inactivity
      and decline—Recrudescence—1745–1800 the high-water mark of
      Highland production—A galaxy of poets—Splendid lyrical
      outburst—New Ossianic cycle—Seana Dana—Caledonian bards—The Welsh
      Eisteddfod—Latest Celtic renaissance—Some characteristic features,
      results, manifestations—Antiquity, thou wondrous charm!


There comes a time in the history of races when, passing from simplicity
to reflection, their deepest nature finds expression in some form of
literature. That time for the Celtic people has been the late fifth, but
more especially the sixth century of our era. And the remarkable fact
confronts us then of a simultaneous poetic awakening in all the chief
groups into which the Celtic remnant had been divided. Ireland,
Scotland, Wales, and Brittany were all involved in this primal literary
activity.

A most curious phenomenon to contemplate is this racial renaissance.
When the great Celtic empire had crumbled, and its defeated fragments
were driven to their last resorts on the outmost confines of Europe,
vanquished by the alien who kept them at bay, suddenly the sundered
remnants burst into song. Plaintive and sad for the most part has been
this utterance, but full of the wealth of sentiment, fancy, and old-time
peculiarities of conception so characteristic of this ancient people.

St. Patrick, St. Sechnall, Dubthach, Fiacc, Dallan Forgaill, and others,
inaugurated the new time in Ireland; St. Columba and his following
accomplished a similar transition for Scotland, opening the pages of
literary history with beautiful hymns and lyrics, which have continued
to this day. In Wales the pregnant sixth century which gave us
Columcille was _the_ great age of bardic literature—the age of such
princes of poetry as Aneurin, Taliessin, Llywarch Hên, and Myrddin.

These are among the most illustrious names of the Celtic past. And in
Brittany the same period is believed to have produced that wonderful
cycle of song, some of which has been taken down from oral recitation so
late as last century by the learned and enthusiastic M. de
Villemarqué,[30] the Macpherson of Brittany, and published in his
delightful _Barzaz-Breiz, Chants populaires de la Bretagne_, a number of
which Mr. Tom Taylor has rendered into English. Those entitled—

                     The Wine of the Gauls,
                     The Prediction of Gwenc’hlan,
                     The Lord Nann and the Fairy,
                     The March of Arthur,
                     The Plague of Elliant,
                     The Drowning of Kaer-Is—

are held to belong to the period with which we are dealing, and to have
been in existence prior at least to the close of the sixth century. They
are all distinguished by the presence of alliteration as well as rhyme,
by a more or less complete division into triplets, like the ancient
Welsh triads, as well as by a distinctly archaic impress in the manners
described, and the feelings of the singer.

The names of the authors have not come down to us, as in the other three
countries, but, having already quoted specimens of the fifth and sixth
century poetry of Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, it might not be
uninteresting now to give characteristic examples of the early
compositions of Brittany.

The Wine of the Gauls is undoubtedly ancient, so ancient indeed, that
Part II. is regarded as a fragment of the song that accompanied the old
Celtic sword-dance in honour of the sun. It runs thus:—

                 Blood wine and glee
                     Sun to thee—
                 Blood wine and glee.
                         Fire! Fire! steel, oh! steel!
                         Fire! fire! steel and fire.
                         Oak! Oak! earth and waves,
                         Waves, oak, earth and oak.

                 Glee of dance and song
                     And battle throng.
                 Battle, dance and song.
                         Fire! fire, etc.

                 Let the sword blades swing
                     In a ring,
                 Let the sword blades swing.
                         Fire! fire, etc.

                 Song of the blue steel
                     Death to feel,
                 Song of the blue steel.
                         Fire! fire, etc.

                 Fight, whereof the sword
                     Is the Lord,
                 Fight of the fell sword!
                         Fire! fire, etc.

                 Sword, thou mighty King
                     Of battle ring,
                 Sword, thou mighty King!
                         Fire! fire, etc.

                 With the rainbow’s light
                     Be thou bright,
                 With the rainbow’s light.
                         Fire! fire, etc.

Far more charming is the episode of Lord Nann and the Fairy, and
genuinely typical of the powerful fancy and natural magic of the Celt.

                The good Lord Nann and his fair bride,
                Were young when wedlock’s knot was tied—
                Were young when death did them divide.

                But yesterday that lady fair
                Two babes as white as snow did bear:
                A man-child and a girl they were.

For making him a manchild’s sire, Lord Nann offered to get his bride any
dainty food she liked, “meat of the woodcock from the lake or of the
wild deer from the brake.” She chose the latter, while she grudged
sending him to the wood.

          The Lord of Nann when this he heard
          Hath gripp’d his oak spear with never a word,

          His bonny black horse he hath leap’d upon;
          And forth to the greenwood he hath gone.

          By the skirts of the wood as he did go,
          He was ’ware of a hind as white as snow;

          Oh fast she ran and fast he rode,
          That the earth it shook where his horse-hoofs trode.

          Oh fast he rode, and fast she ran,
          That the sweat to drop from his brow began,

          That the sweat on his horse’s flanks stood white
          So he rode and rode till the fall o’ the night.

          When he came to a stream that fed a lawn
          Hard by the grot of a Corrigaun.

          The grass grew thick by the streamlet brink,
          And he lighted down off his horse to drink.

          The Corrigaun sat by the fountain fair,
          A-combing her long and yellow hair;

          A-combing her hair with a comb of gold—
          (Not poor, I trow, are those maidens cold)—

          Now who’s the bold wight that dares come here
          To trouble my fairy fountain clear?

          Either thou straight shalt wed with me
          Or pine for four long years and three,
          Or dead in three days’ space shalt be.

This proposal he spurned, asserting that he was already married, and
would die on the spot ere he would take a Corrigaun to wife. Her spell
she cast, and instantly he feels sick. On return he bids his mother make
his bed, for in three days she would hear his passing-bell, but adjures
her never to tell the tale to his bride. The three days expire, and the
latter inquires of her mother-in-law why the Church bells toll and the
priests chant in the street below, all clad in their white vestments? “A
strange poor man had died,” was the evasive answer. Then she asks
whither her husband had gone, and on being assured he would soon be
back, the unsuspecting lady concerns herself with the kind of gown she
would wear for her churching. Said her mother-in-law:—

              “The fashion of late, my child, hath grown,
              That women for churching black should don.”

And then:—

               As through the churchyard porch she stept
               She saw the grave where her husband slept.

And the dialogue proceeds:—

              “Who of our blood is lately dead
              That our ground is new raked and spread?”

              “The truth I may no more forbear,
              My son—your own poor lord—lies there.”

              She threw herself on her knees amain,
              And from her knees ne’er rose again.

              That night they laid her, dead and cold
              Beside her lord beneath the mould;
              When lo!—a marvel to behold!—

              Next morn from the grave two oak trees fair
              Shot lusty boughs into the air;

              And in their boughs—oh wondrous sight—
              Two happy doves all snowy white—

              That sang as ever the morn did rise
              And then flew up—into the skies.

In addition to the songs, Villemarqué published _The Breton Bards of the
Sixth Century_, but Renan preferred the songs as by far the better.

The impulse given by the first literary awakening continued in Ireland,
Scotland, and Wales for two or three centuries, until the confusion and
disintegration of the Norse invasions put an end to it. During this
early and brilliant period the Celt poured forth the richest treasures
of his nature. Before the foe triumphed, many valuable pieces of
literature, including the heroic sagas, had been committed to writing,
and thus preserved for posterity, though it is known that much was
destroyed by the reckless invader. It was a bright morning—this dawn of
letters—too suddenly clouded and overcast.

For a century or two after, the Celtic field in its various parts
remained singularly barren and unproductive. Ireland was not altogether
without poets and scholars, though greatly fallen from her pristine
glory, but in Wales, from the middle of the seventh century till the
year 1080, hardly any poetry of merit was produced, and the same might
be said of Scotland, and, it would appear, of Brittany also.

No illustrious bards or outstanding writers redeemed the general dearth
of the tenth century. That was the darkest hour before another brilliant
dawn.

Ossian, St. Patrick, and Columcille; Dubthach and King Laoghaire; Prince
Arthur and his knights; Taliessin and the Royal Urien, Aneurin, Llywarch
Hên; what were these but memories? vanished heroes and bards of the
past. Already the walls of Balclutha were desolate, the harp hung mute
in Tara’s hall; nay, Tara itself was now a simulacrum,—a ruin, deserted
for ever. And even from Caerleon and Dun-Reged had not the glory
departed? Too soon the sun, late-risen, had sunk upon the unhappy Celts,
defeated in war and now dumb and helplessly inarticulate in literature.
It seemed as if, swan-like, the pathetic remnants of this old race had
at length sung their dying song, and sunk into silent and finished
oblivion.

To such a pass to all appearance, through Carlyle’s “star-fire and
immortal tears,” had Destiny led these hapless peoples by the advent of
the tenth century, that he would be a visionary indeed who should
prophesy any renaissance, and a true seer, for the time being, who
should say—

                                   ... Look
               Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there.

Yet, phœnix-like, is it not ever the fate of the hidden and precarious
Celtic genius to rearise from its ashes and reassert its vitality? And
so in the eleventh and twelfth centuries there was such a wonderful
literary awakening throughout Celtdom, that it was as when:—

                                    ... A sable cloud
              Turns forth her silver lining on the night.

And this new activity, be it noted, was not confined to the Gaels of
Ireland and Scotland, but, as in the sixth century, comprehended the
Cymri of Wales and Brittany also.

Herein lies a strange trait of Celtic life, that the great literary
revivals should be thus simultaneous, and common to all the sundered
groups, though these latter are isolated so much linguistically and
locally. Not once or twice in their history has this curious affinity of
genius and sentiment been evinced.

In the case of the Gael, no sooner was the grip of the Vikings relaxed
than the bards and schools began to flourish again. The new Irish king,
the semi-usurper Brian Boru, helped much towards this happy
consummation, as he was a real patron of letters and worked hard to
restore the fallen fortunes of Gaelic literature. Early in the eleventh
century he was on the throne, and that and the following century
witnessed the new and copious revival of art and learning. To this
period belong the great monuments, such as the Leabhar Na h’Uidhre, the
Book of Hymns, the Book of Leinster, as well as the Scottish Book of
Deer.

During these two centuries a host of poets and some annalists lived, the
chief of whom were Flann of Monasterboice and Tighernach. Quite a number
of the names of prominent bards who wrote then are given by Dr. Hyde in
his _Literary History of Ireland_. And we know that from this time the
interest taken in the past gave rise to that rich and abundant medieval
succession of books of saga common to Ireland and Scotland. But though
these latter were compiled, some of them after the twelfth century, the
actual revival did not last beyond the Norman Conquest of Ireland, which
culminated at the close of that same twelfth century, arresting Irish
development and disintegrating Irish life. So that for 300 years after,
Erin produced nothing comparable to her former achievements.

Turning to the Cymri, on the other hand, we find the remarkable
intellectual awakening of the eleventh and twelfth centuries ushered in
in a similar way as in Ireland, by the advent of new rulers. Rhys ap
Tewdwr, who had taken refuge in Brittany, returned in 1077 and ascended
the throne of South Wales, to which he laid claim as true heir. And
Gruffyd ap Kynan, similarly exiled in Ireland, came back to reign in
North Wales in 1080. Uniting their forces in one first great attempt,
these two hereditary princes overthrew the reigning monarch, and were
confirmed on the thrones of their ancestors.

Like Brian in Ireland, they also in their own fatherland were
instrumental in introducing a new era of literature. In North Wales it
showed itself in a revival of poetry, while in South Wales it took the
form of prose. Thomas Stephens mentions no less than seventy-nine bards
who lived between 1080 and 1400, many of whose pieces are still extant
in MSS.

To this period belong the greatest monuments of Welsh genius—_The Four
Ancient Books of Wales_, and the wonderful cycle of romance treasured
for us in the Mabinogion, besides those numerous compositions
traditionally attributed to Taliessin, Myrddinn, and others. Chronicles,
romances, poems, mabinogion, and a large collection of moral and
historical triads—these constitute the result of that extraordinary
outburst of creative energy which dates from the days of Gruffyd ap
Kynan.

Nor was Brittany asleep during this literary activity, for she too had
her share in common with Wales in the origin and dissemination of the
Arthurian romance.

It is one of the problems of criticism to-day, rightly to apportion the
credit between the two countries.

Robert Wace undoubtedly drew from independent Breton sources as well as
from Geoffrey of Monmouth. And from the eleventh century onwards date
the historic and narrative ballads so characteristic of Brittany. A
selection of these have been translated into English by Mr. Taylor, and
all of those he gives came into existence, he assures us, before the end
of the fourteenth century. So we have such medieval titles as, “The Evil
Tribute of Nomenöe,” “Bran,” “The Return from Saxon-land,” “The
Crusader’s Wife,” “The Clerk of Rohan,” “Baron Jauïoz,” “The Battle of
the Thirty,” “Jean of the Flame,” “Du Guesclin’s Vassal,” and “The
Wedding Girdle”—titles not unlike Chaucer’s own.

Bran, the hero of the second ballad, is believed to have been taken
prisoner in the great battle recorded in history as having been fought
in the tenth century near Kerloän, between the Norsemen and the Bretons,
under Ewen the Great.

                 Sore wounded lies the good knight Bran
                 On the foughten field of Kerloän.

                 On Kerloän’s field, hard by the shore,
                 Lieth the grandson of Bran-Vor.

                 Maugre our Bretons won the day,
                 He’s bound and o’er sea borne away.

                 Borne over sea, shut up, alone,
                 In Donjon tower he made his moan.

Bran dies in captivity.

       On the battlefield of Kerloän
       There grows a tree looks o’er the lan’;

       There grows an oak in the place of stour, (_i.e._ battle)
       Where the Saxon fled from Ewen-Vor.

       Upon this oak, when the moon shines bright,
       The birds they gather from the night.

       Sea-mews, pied-black and white are there
       On every forehead a bloodspeck clear.

       With them a corbie, ashgrey for eld
       And a young crow[31] aye at her side beheld.

       Wayworn seem the twain, with wings that dreep,
       As birds that flight o’er sea must keep.

       So sweetly sing these birds, and clear,
       The great sea stills its waves to hear.

       And aye their songs one burden hold
       All save the young crow’s and the corbie’s old.

       And this is ever the crow’s sore cry,
       “Sing, little birds, sing merrily.”

       “Sing, birds o’ the land, in merry strain,
       You died not far from your own Bretayne.”

Besides these narrative ballads, Brittany produced at various periods
idyllic songs and religious canticles.

As for Cornwall, whose dialect is now extinct, she never produced much
of a Celtic literature. What there is still extant is preserved in MSS.
of the fifteenth century, representing possibly all the ancient
literature she ever had, and dates from that or the preceding fourteenth
century. These pieces consist of one poem, entitled “Mount Calvary,” and
three dramas, or miracle plays, with nothing distinctly Celtic about
them save the language. With the exception of these and another drama of
the seventeenth century (1611), and the Lord’s Prayer translated, the
obsolete and defunct Cornish dialect has no literature to show, and
therefore is not concerned in the special Celtic revivals characteristic
of the literature in the other dialects. A translation of the ancient
dramas from the original Cornish has been made and published thirty
years ago by Edwin Norris. Their value now is almost solely linguistic.
“The last survivor of those who spoke in their youth pure Cornish is
said to have been Dolly Pentreath of Mousehole near Penzance, who died
in 1778, aged 102. And even she would not have talked Cornish in her
youth if she had not lived in one of the few parishes along the coasts
of Mount’s Bay and St Ive’s Bay, and a few districts to the west of
those bays, where alone at the beginning of the last century
(eighteenth) the ancient dialect existed.” (Morley’s _English Writers_,
vol. i. p. 750.)

After the brilliant medieval renaissance came another period of
inactivity and decline. From the sixteenth century it is true that a new
series of poets and prose writers began to arrive in the different
Celtic nationalities. In Ireland, during the first half of the
seventeenth century, there was quite a distinguished recrudescence of
national scholarship, associated with the names of Geoffrey Keating, the
Four Masters, and Duald Mac Firbis, all of whom were prose writers of
eminence; and in the Highlands of Scotland flourished Mary Macleod and
her contemporaries.

But we must come down to the period immediately following the Forty-five
to encounter a more general and splendid resuscitation.

And this time the Highlands especially were prominently to the front.
Hitherto, though possessing bards of mark, not since the days of
Columcille did the Scottish Gael burst so richly and abundantly and
tunefully into song. It seemed as if the accumulated and pent-up
sentiments of generations, at last overflowing, had found outlet and
expression. The great Jacobite risings furnished the incentive.
Involving, as they did, the profoundest issues for the individual, the
family life, and the whole structure of society in the Highlands, these
far-reaching events stirred the deepest emotions in the Gaelic breast,
which found utterance on tongues which otherwise might for ever have
remained silent.

Surpassing the story even of Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table,
because more near, more real and historical, the romance of Prince
Charlie and the Highland chiefs has taken a lasting hold of the popular
imagination. It has woven itself into deathless song and story. The
poetry and music it has elicited in the Highlands alone are among the
sweetest creations of Celtic genius. They convey a pathos of sound,
richness of rhythm, and perfection of harmony that is captivating even
to foreign ears.

The period between 1745 and 1800 may be regarded as the high-water mark
of Highland poetry. For quality and quantity combined, it has never been
reached in the past, and is not likely now ever to be rivalled in the
future. Never before in Gaelic Scotland had there been such a quick and
splendid succession of bards. In fact, within those fifty years after
Culloden we have nearly all the great names of Highland poetry—certainly
those best known and which rank highest in the national esteem. A mere
list of the more important is sufficient to attest this.

There were living then Alexander Macdonald, better known as Alasdair
Macmhaighstir Alasdair; John Maccodrum, the North Uist bard; Hector
Macleod of South Uist; Dugald Buchanan; David Mackellar; Rob Donn;
Duncan Macintyre, popularly called Donnachadh Bàn; Lauchlan Macpherson,
John Roy Stuart, Kenneth Mackenzie, James Macpherson, Dr. John Smith,
John Clark, Mrs. Grant of Laggan, William Ross, Allan Macdougall, James
Shaw, James Macgregor, Ewan Maclachlan, Alexander MacKinnon, Donald
Macdonald, and Donald Macleod—a goodly number and highly representative
to appear in that single half century.

It is somewhat remarkable that Ireland, too, shared in the Jacobite
poetic reawakening, though she had so partial and distant a hand in the
actual warfare. Without doubt, her people thoroughly sympathised with
the gallant attempt of Prince Charlie. And this is abundantly evidenced
by the popularity and amount of the national poetry. Not only might a
list of names be given, similar to the above, though fewer in number,
but Dr. Hyde assures us that the Jacobite poems of Ireland would, if
collected, fill a large-sized volume. Hardiman printed about fifteen in
the second volume of his _Irish Minstrelsy_, and O’Daly about
twenty-five more in his _Irish Jacobite Poetry_, second edition.

Comparing this splendid lyrical outburst of that period in the two
countries, Dr. Hyde expresses his own opinion in the following
interesting criticism: “There seems to me,” he says, “to be perhaps,
more substance and more simplicity and straightforward diction in the
poems of the Scottish Gaels, and more melody and word-play, purchased at
the expense of a good deal of nebulousness and unmeaning sound in those
of the Irish Gaels; both, though they utterly fail in the ballad, have
brought the lyric to a very high pitch of perfection.”

But the literary revival of the eighteenth century was not by any means
confined to the work of the lyrical poets either in Scotland, Wales, or
Ireland. It was this period, the latter half of the century, that
witnessed the new Ossianic cycle, associated with the name of
Macpherson. Though popularly supposed to be, the latter was not the
earliest pioneer of this movement. In 1756, four years before
Macpherson’s _Fragments_ appeared, Jerome Stone, who was in youth a
packman, and afterwards a teacher at Dunkeld, gave to the public the
first translation of old Gaelic poems ever published. On his death, that
same year at the age of thirty, he left a collection, gleaned by
himself, of ancient Ossianic ballads, which has recently passed into the
possession of Edinburgh University.

Stone undoubtedly had the bardic gift; his rendering of the original is
quite as free as Macpherson’s own. The following may be quoted as an
example of his style. It is taken from “Fraoch’s Death,” published in
the _Scots Magazine_, 1756, shortly before he died:—

           But now he’s gone and nought remains but woe
             For wretched me; with him my joys are fled;
           Around his tomb my tears shall ever flow,
             The rock my dwelling, and the clay my bed;
           Ye maids and matrons from your hills descend,
             To join my moan and answer tear for tear;
           With me the hero to the grave attend,
             And sing the songs of mourning round his bier,
           Through his own grove his praise we will proclaim,
           And bid the place for ever bear his name.

Stone did not catch on, like his more brilliant successor.

Before then, except for the fragments that survived, mainly on the lips
of oral tradition throughout the Highlands, the old-time volume of saga
and heroic poetry had well nigh sunk into oblivion. The MSS. lay
neglected in odd and distant corners of the land, hidden and
inaccessible, so that the new generations of Gaels as they appeared were
wholly ignorant of their existence. The stirring events of the times
themselves were not conducive towards the more peaceful study and
pursuit of literature. Hence, with the better known publication of
Macpherson’s contributions there came to the view of modern times, with
startling suddenness, an old deposit of literary wealth, which quite
astonished the age. It was as if by some convulsion, ancient strata of
underlying rock had suddenly upheaved and found access to the surface,
much to the wonder and curiosity of all.

The heather was immediately ablaze. A new enthusiasm was awakened in the
past. Gaelic scholarship was taxed to the uttermost to substantiate the
credit of this new fame. Libraries were scrutinised, ancient houses
searched, memories ransacked, and every remote township and glen scoured
to find material. And when material was not forthcoming in sufficient
amount, the Muses were invoked to supply the deficiency.

It is now well understood that the period was one of abnormal activity
in the production of Ossianic poetry. This might be inferred from the
existing British collections of Gaelic MSS., most of which are posterior
to the age of Macpherson. Many imitators sought to emulate the ancient
bards, and even to palm their modern productions upon the public as part
of the original deposit. So late as the day of Mackenzie of “The
Beauties” such pieces as “Mordubh,” “Collath,” and “The Aged Bard’s
Wish” were regarded as ancient and authentic, though there are few
people now, and certainly no recognised authority on the subject,
prepared to maintain that.

Certain of these eighteenth century creations are of great merit. Though
they lack the antiquity they profess, they are worthy to rank alongside
the poetry of the period. Dr. Smith’s _Seana Dana_ or _Old Lays_, for
example, are reckoned fully as interesting and poetical in the original
Gaelic as Macpherson’s _Ossian_; yet, unlike the latter, his English
translation is a poor substitute for the really fresh and idiomatic
vernacular which he published. One of his finest poems, “Dan an Deirg,”
has been rendered into English, edited, and annotated by an accomplished
Englishman, Mr. C. S. Jerram, a scholar and graduate of Cambridge.

In Mr. Pattison’s _Gaelic Bards_ we have a translation in dainty verses
of another of his poems, entitled “Finan and Lorma.” Here the young
people around the ancient Ossian are represented as addressing the bard
in these lines:—

         While on the plains shines the moon, O Bard!
         And the shadow of Cona holds;
         Like a ghost breathes the wind from the mountain,
         With its spirit voice in its folds.

         There are two cloudy forms before us,
         Where its host the dim night shows;
         The sigh of the moon curls their tresses,
         As they tread over Alva of roes.

         Dusky his dogs came with one,
         And he bends his dark bow of yew;
         There’s a stream from the side of the sad-faced maid,
         Dyes her robe with a blood-red hue.

         Hold thou back, O thou wind! from the mountain,
         Let their image a moment stay;
         Nor sweep with thy skirts from our eyesight,
         Nor scatter their beauty away.

         O’er the glen of the rushes, the hill of the hinds,
         With the vague wandering vapours they go;
         O! Bard of the times that have left us,
         Aught of their life can’st thou show?

To which Ossian replies:—

          The years that have been they come back as ye speak,
            To my soul in their music they glide;
          Like the murmur of waves in the far inland calm,
            Is their soft and smooth step by my side.

Smith’s translation appeared in 1780, and the originals, nominally from
the Gaelic of Ossian, Ullin, and Orran, etc., in 1787. The poems were
fourteen in number, with titles as follow: “The Lay of the Red,” “The
Death of Gaul,” “The Lay of Duhona,” “Diarmad,” “Clan Morni,” or “Finan
and Lorma,” “The War of Linne,” “Cathula,” “The War of Manus,” including
“The Lay of the Great Fool,” “Trahul,” “Dargo,” “Conn,” “The Burning of
Taura,” “Calava,” and “The Death of Art.”

In the lay of Taura there occurs the much admired word-portrait
entitled, “Aisling air dhreach Mna,” or “The Vision of a Fair Woman.”
This is how she looked in the eye of her Gaelic admirer, and one can
judge if her charms match those of Aspasia or of Cleopatra:—

                  Innseam pàirt do dreach nan reul;
                  Bu gheal a deud gu h-ùr dlù;
                  Mar channach an t-sléibh
                  Bha cneas fa h-eideadh ùr.

                    Bha a bràighe cearclach bàn
                  Mar shneachda tlà nam beann;
                  Bha a dà chich ag eiridh làn;
                  B’e’n dreach sud miann nan sonn.

                    Bu shoitheamh binn a gloir;
                  S’ bu deirge na’n ròs a beul;
                  Mar chobhar a sios n’a taobh
                  Sinte gu caol bha gach meur.

                    Bha a dà chaol mhala mhine
                  Dûdhonn air liomh an loin.
                  A da ghruaidh dhreachd nan caoran;
                  ’Si gu iomlan saor o chron.

                    Bha a gnuis mar bharra-gheuga
                  Anns a cheud-fhás ûr;
                  A falt buidhe mar óradh shleibhtean;
                  ’S mar dhearsadh gréine bha sûil.

The Gaelic is not easily translated into felicitous English, but it has
been given by Dr. Macneill, somewhat literally thus:—

           Tell us some of the charms of the stars;
           Close and well-set were her ivory teeth;
           White as the cannach upon the moor
           Was her bosom the tartan bright beneath.

             Her well-rounded forehead shone
           Soft and fair as the mountain snow;
           Her two breasts were heaving full;
           To them did the hearts of the heroes flow.

             Her lips were ruddier than the rose,
           Tender and tunefully sweet her tongue;
           White as the foam adown her side
           Her delicate fingers extended hung.

             Smooth as the dusky down of the elk
           Appeared her two narrow brows to me;
           Lovely her cheeks were like berries red;
           From every guile she was wholly free.

             Her countenance looked like the gentle buds
           Unfolding their beauties in early spring;
           Her yellow locks like the gold-browed hills,
           And her eyes like the radiance the sunbeams bring.

In the same year, 1780, in which Dr. Smith issued his renderings,
another small volume of translations of so-called ancient Gaelic poetry
appeared under the title _Caledonian Bards_. It was by John Clark,
apparently a very much poorer imitator of Macpherson, and hailing from
the latter’s own native district, Badenoch. Among the poems submitted,
appears the “Mordubh,” already referred to, and which in its vernacular
garb has misled more than one Celtic enthusiast. Of the latter, besides
Mackenzie, Mrs. Grant of Laggan, 1755–1838, was so far deceived that,
taking Clark’s eighteenth century contribution for genuine ancient
poetic material, she set herself to render some of it into more
beautiful verse of her own. A contemporary and friend of Sir Walter
Scott, this lady takes a high place in the Highland English literature
of the period. A third who lived in her time, and who had no mean poetic
gift, was the Rev. Duncan Maccallum of Arisaig, the author of “Collath,”
that other composition which passed for a time as a specimen of ancient
poetry. But enough has been said to show the range of this derived and
imitative activity.

It will be seen that while on the one hand the Jacobite romance gave
rise to a new poetic revival, the Ossianic compositions, on the other
hand, proved also a source of general Celtic inspiration during the
latter half of the eighteenth century, and for two decades, at least, of
the nineteenth. Though the impulse of the Prince Charlie episode did not
carry to Wales as it did to Ireland, that of the Ossianic cycle did, and
issued in a similar enthusiasm in the production and publication of
books of Welsh poetry. This interest became so widespread that in 1819
the national Eisteddfod was revived once more at Caermarthen, and
regained its old place in the hearts of the people. Without discussing
the tradition that ascribes its origin to the sixth century, it is now
fairly well ascertained that it is, at least, as old as the twelfth or
thirteenth century. History shows that Prince Griffith of South Wales
held a great Eisteddfod at Caermarthen in 1451, at which the twenty-four
metres of Welsh poetry were settled for all time. Since then it has had
a chequered career; officially patronised by the Tudors, it seems to
have declined under the Stuarts, and nearly perished under the first
three Hanoverians. But now, since its revival in 1819, nearly every
hamlet in Wales holds its annual Eisteddfod, and the national one has
grown to such a magnitude that it tends not only to keep alive the
Celtic spirit, but also to foster the love of music and poetry in the
Principality.

Like much of our own Highland barderie, the Welsh poetry is the product
of workmen who have never been taught to read or write their own
language in the schools. Yet such is their natural taste and sense of
style that some of their best modern lyrics need not fear comparison
with those of Tannahill or even of Burns. Undoubtedly such poetry has
serious limitations, but it has a charm and beauty of its own, and is as
fresh and limpid as the mountain streams. The fragrance of the heather
is upon it quite as much as it is upon the lyrics of our own bards in
the Highlands. And as these latter felt the charm of the towering
mountain, the gloomy glen, the forest solitude, the lonely mysterious
sea, the bubbling stream, the wildflower, and the changing seasons, and
gave felicitous and sympathetic expression to the emotions these
awakened in their breasts, so did the peasant poets of Wild Wales. All
through last century, both in the Highlands and in that country, there
have been a succession of minor bards who have maintained the native
tongue sweet and warm and tuneful by their lyrics, though in Ireland the
same cannot be said, as the language there until quite recently had not
been fostered so much as in the sister countries.

But to-day we constantly read of ourselves as passing through another
Celtic renaissance, and this is the last which falls to be noticed. It
took its rise half a century ago in the work of the scholars, and
doubtless was the natural sequence of the widespread interest aroused at
home and abroad by the Ossianic compositions. It was recognised that
there was material to work upon, which could be dealt with from a
scientific as well as a literary point of view. And so the renaissance
in the first instance was a revival of interest in the language itself,
and the ancient MS. monuments that contained its oldest forms.

Two sets of scholars interested themselves in this new line of research.
On the one hand, distinguished Irishmen like John O’Donovan and Eugene
O’Curry devoted themselves to the task of bringing to light the
neglected and hidden MS. remains, which had hitherto for centuries lain
in the obscurity of religious or public libraries unread and
uncatalogued. And through these treasures they sought to interpret the
Gaelic past. On the other hand, Continental savants such as Bopp, Zeuss,
and Ebel, deeply absorbed in philological studies, were already at work
on the linguistic problem, which has rescued the Celtic dialects from an
unnatural isolation and equally unmerited contempt.

Zeuss’s book in particular, published in 1853—the Gaelic part of it
founded on the study of Gaelic Continental MSS., illuminated the whole
field, just as much as if the searchlight had been turned on a dark and
hidden landscape. From that day a Celtic renaissance was assured. His
philological results, and the fact that the ancient dialects had now
been proved beyond question to belong to the great Aryan group, and
closely akin to the classic languages of Europe, gave the Celtic a new
importance and fired the enthusiasm of that subsequent galaxy of
scholars, who have made Celtic studies famous.

Surprised and charmed with the prestige their own language and
literature had thus suddenly acquired in the eyes of Europe, and
especially of learned philologists, many of the Celts themselves now
began to look with kindlier interest upon their own literary legacy and
to recognise its value. The attention thus drawn to the past gradually
aroused enthusiasm for every surviving relic of tradition, of
literature, of history, of social custom, and of music. It has led to
the foundation of Celtic chairs for the study of the language and
literature, notably at Oxford, Edinburgh, and Berlin. It has given rise
to the Gaelic Mòd, Irish Text Society, and numerous other Highland,
Irish, and Welsh Associations, and kindred periodicals, British,
American, and Continental. Never before has such a mass of Celtic
tradition and lore been brought to view, and published in book or
magazine, as there has been within the last few decades.

It cannot indeed be said that this renaissance has added any new
masterpieces to the native literatures, either in prose or poetry. A
wonderful outburst of literary activity there has been, and
distinguished authors have arrived; but the remarkable thing is, and it
is worthy of note, that the so-called Celtic renaissance, if we regard
it solely from its literary side and apart from the work of scholars,
has found its fullest expression in English, and addresses itself not so
much to the native Gaels or Cymri as to the English-speaking world in
general. Highland, Welsh, and Irish litterateurs have taken to placing
their wealth of dream, of poetic sentiment and imagination, as well as
their marvellous gift of story-telling, at the service of English
literature, which is accordingly enriched, while the old river dries up
in proportion as the number of readers and writers of the original
tongue declines.

There are some things that we cannot hope to resuscitate. They pass in
the nature of things. Some that we would not wish to recall even if we
might. They have served their day. And if the current Celtic renaissance
has not contributed as much to the vernacular literature as might be
desired, it has certainly immensely enhanced the glories of the past,
and it has otherwise exhibited a revival of Celtic _esprit de corps_
which shows that—

               The ancient spirit is not dead—
               Old times, methinks, are breathing there.

That this race-feeling survives, this kinship of blood, and is ever and
anon reasserting itself, may be inferred from the recent Pan-Celtic
Congress in Dublin, where representatives of Wales, of Brittany, of the
Highlands, of Ireland, and even of Celtdom beyond the seas, assembled in
all their ancient _tailoring_ to do homage to the past, to reckon with
the present, and formulate afresh their aspirations—to ask, in fact,
what does this latest renaissance mean? and whither tends it?

A truly heterogeneous gathering, and eminently characteristic of the
race, who still look wistfully for the return of Arthur or of the Feinn,
and some new age of magic and romance, and whose forte it is unceasingly
to pursue the unknown, the undefinable, the ideal.

We can picture the bewildered surprise and irrepressible mirth of the
average, unimaginative, unbelieving Sassenach, as he suddenly encounters
the extraordinary Pan-Celtic pageant on the living streets of Dublin.
Whence this resurrection of phantoms—these apparitions of long dead
ancestors? “Nay, good citizen, ’tis no phantasy,” sober reason replies,
“but one of various manifestations, perhaps the most evanescent of the
present Celtic renaissance, which finds little in our modern,
materialistic civilisation answering to its deepest aspirations.” And,
falling into reverie over the unwonted spectacle, we ourselves in our
wonderment musingly repeat the words of Charles Lamb:—

  Antiquity! thou wondrous charm, what art thou? that being nothing, art
  everything! When thou wert, thou wert not antiquity—then thou wert
  nothing, but hadst a remoter _antiquity_, as thou calledst it, to look
  back to with blind veneration; thou thyself being to thyself, flat,
  jejune, _modern_! What mystery lurks in this retroversion? or what
  half Januses are we, that we cannot look forward with the same
  idolatry with which we for ever revert? The mighty future is as
  nothing, being everything; the past is everything, being nothing.




                              CHAPTER XIV
                  HIGHLAND BARDS BEFORE THE FORTY-FIVE

  “The Owlet”—Three Macgregor songs—The old bardic system superseded—Era
      of modern Gaelic poetry—Mary Macleod—Details of her life—Famous
      songs—Iain Lom—Ardent poet and politician—His “Vow”—Eventful
      career—Poems—Created Gaelic Poet-Laureate—Influence on Highland
      history—Other minor bards and bardesses—Imitations by Sir Walter
      Scott—The blind harper, and the blind piper—A comic poet—Two major
      bards—Maccodrum’s Muse—Characteristics of the group before the
      Forty-five.


The Book of the Dean of Lismore may be regarded as having gathered up
the best of the available, medieval, Gaelic poetry, and as having closed
the old bardic period. After it there came a break of nearly a hundred
years. It is true that there are some pieces which hail from this
interval, but they are isolated and few, with no certain dates.

Of these, the most remarkable is that styled “The Owlet,” and it is
worthy of notice here as being the only composition of the kind in the
language. The poem is attributed to Donald Macdonald, a native of
Lochaber, and perhaps the most expert archer of his day. Withal a famous
wolf-hunter, he appears to have lived in the days before firearms, and
to have composed the verses when old. Their occasion is briefly
summarised by Mackenzie of “The Beauties,” in a footnote. In his
declining years the poet had married a young woman who proved a very
unmeet helpmate. For when he and his dog were worn down with the toils
of the chase, and infirmities rendered them stiff and decrepit, this
“crooked rib” took a pleasure in teasing them. Finding an old feeble owl
one day, she installed it in the house as a more fitting companion than
herself for the aged bard and his dog. The poem is an ingenious
performance in the form of a dialogue between the outraged husband and
the bird.

Three Macgregor songs of that period have likewise a wonderful charm and
pathos. They are entitled “Macgregor’s Lullaby,” “Macgregor’s O’Ruara,”
and “The Braes of the Ceathach.” The authoress of the first laments the
death of her husband, who, with his father and brother, were beheaded at
the instigation of Colin Campbell of Glenorchy; her own sire, Campbell
of Glenlyon; and Menzies of Rannoch. The following verses are from
Pattison’s rendering:—

              Early on a Lammas morning,
              With my husband was I gay;
              But my heart got sorely wounded
              Ere the middle of the day.

              (chorus)  Ochan, Ochan, Ochan uiri,
                        Though I cry, my child, with thee—
                        Ochan, Ochan, Ochan uiri,
                        Now he hears not thee nor me.

              Malison on judge and kindred—
              They have wrought me mickle woe;
              With deceit they came about us,
              Through deceit they laid him low.

              Had they met but twelve Macgregors,
              With my Gregor at their head;
              Now my child had not been orphaned,
              Nor these bitter tears been shed.

              On an oaken block they laid him,
              And they spilt his blood around;
              I’d have drunk it in a goblet
              Largely, ere it reached the ground.

                     ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

              When the rest have all got lovers
              Now a lover have I none;
              My fair blossom, fresh and fragrant,
              Withers on the ground alone.

              While all other wives the night-time
              Pass in slumber’s balmy bands;
              I, beside my bedside weary,
              Never cease to wring my hands.

              Far, far better be with Gregor
              Where the heather’s in its prime,
              Than with mean and Lowland barons
              In a house of stone and lime.

                     ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

              Bahu, bahu, little nursling—
              Oh! so tender now and weak;
              I fear the day will never brighten
              When revenge for him you’ll seek.

                  Ochan, Ochan, Ochan uiri,
                  Though I cry, my child, with thee—
                  Ochan, Ochan, Ochan uiri
                  Yet he hears not thee nor me.

We pass by the few existing lines of Bishop Carsewell and Sir John
Stewart of Appin, who both lived in the sixteenth century, and forthwith
emerge upon the new time, the era of modern Gaelic poetry. Almost
simultaneously in Scotland and Ireland, a great change took place in the
form and complexion of this vernacular poetic literature. From the early
part of the seventeenth century, the intricate metres and technicalities
of the old bardic system, which had been in vogue for a thousand years,
began to be discarded and superseded, and more freedom in versifying
introduced. Dr. Douglas Hyde sums up the principles of this new
departure in two sentences: first, the adoption of vowel rhyme in place
of consonantal rhyme; second, the adoption of a certain number of
accents in each line in place of a certain number of syllables. And in
consequence of these changes, he holds that the Gaelic poetry of the
last two centuries is probably the most sensuous attempt to convey music
in words ever made by man. He who has once heard it and remains deaf to
its charm can have little heart for song or soul for music. It is
absolutely impossible, he says, to convey the lusciousness of sound,
richness of rhythm, and perfection of harmony in another language. The
sweetest creation of all Gaelic literature, this new outburst of lyric
melody was a wonderful arrangement of vowel sounds, so placed that in
every accented syllable, first one vowel and then another fell upon the
ear in all possible kinds of harmonious modifications. Some verses are
made wholly on the à sound, others on the ò, ù, è, or ì sounds, but the
majority on a unique and fascinating intermixture of two, three, or
more; as, for example, in Mary Macleod’s vowel-rhyming over the drowning
of Mac-Ille Chalum in the angry Minch between Stornoway and Raasay:—

                   Mo bhèud, ’s mo bhròn,
                   Mar dh’eirich dhò
                   Muir beucach, mòr,
                   Ag leum mu d’bhòrd,
                   Thu féin, ’s do shèoid
                   ’Nuair reub ’ur seòil,
                   Nach d’fhaod sibh treòir
                     A chaitheadh orr.

                   ’S e an sgeul’ craiteach
                   Do’n mhnaoi a d’fhag thu,
                   ’S do t-aon bhrathair,
                   A shuidh na t’aite,
                   Diluain Càisge,
                   Chaidh tonn bàit ort,
                     Craobh a b’aird’ de’n ubhal thu.

To give the effect in English the original has been somewhat freely,
though not quite accurately, rendered thus:—

                         My grief, my pain,
                         Relief was vain
                         The seething wave
                         Did leap and rave
                         And reeve in twain,
                         Both sheet and sail,
                         And leave us bare
                           And foundering.

                         Alas! indeed,
                         For her you leave.
                         Your brother’s grief
                         To them will cleave.
                         It was on Easter
                         Monday’s feast
                         The branch of peace
                           Went down with you.

It has been acknowledged even by Dr. Hyde, one of our greatest Irish
authorities of the present, that the Scottish Gaels led the way in this
great change that transformed the Celtic poetry of both Islands, and to
Mary Macleod, popularly known as “Mairi nighean Alasdair Ruaidh,” has
been assigned the honour of being the first of the modern Highland bards
to inaugurate the new system.

Before her day most of the Gaelic poetry was Ossianic, or of uncertain
authorship; fugitive, and generally in the ancient style. The poets were
bound by the rules of their order, and to excel within the very narrow
limits of the old-world prosody, hedged about as it was with so many
technicalities, required years of severe bardic study and preparation.
Mary, apparently without any tuition, without even the power to read or
write, suddenly burst these unnatural bonds asunder, and gave to the
spirit of her poetry the freedom of the elements, unhampered and
unfettered by the intricate metres of the Schools. She invented rhythms
of her own, often making the music of sound an echo of the sense. And
from her time scores of new and brilliant metres have made their
appearance.

Only a few biographical details of this remarkable woman are known, but
they are characteristic, and extremely interesting, revealing a
personality outside the common order of Highland intellect. Born in
Roudal, Harris, in the year 1569, she was the daughter of Alexander
Macleod, son of Alasdair Ruadh, a descendant of the chief of that
distinguished clan; and at an early age, apparently, she became a nurse
in the family of the Macleods at Dunvegan Castle. Though otherwise
illiterate, the poetic Mary must have derived some culture,
independently of book learning, from her association with the chiefs and
their following in the ancestral home where, nearly 200 years
afterwards, Dr. Johnson and his friend were so hospitably entertained.
In the course of her long career, for she lived to be 105 years old, she
nursed no less than five lairds of the Macleods,[32] and two of the
lairds of Applecross.

There is no evidence that she was much addicted to the making of poetry
until somewhat advanced in life. It was then at least that she composed
those pieces that have survived and made her name illustrious in
Highland literature. Most of them have reference to events that happened
in the Macleod family.

Thus the song, “An Talla ’m bu ghna le Mac Leoid,” was produced
extempore during the last illness of one of the lairds. Happening to ask
Mary facetiously what kind of a lament she would make for him after he
was gone, she declared in response that it would be a very mournful one.
“Come nearer me,” said the aged chief, “and let me hear part of it,”
whereupon the clever bardess sang this pathetic dirge. The power of
extemporising poetical compositions still lingers in the Highlands.

Again, “Hithill, uthill agus hò,” owes its existence to the gift of a
snuff-mull bestowed on Mary by a son of Sir Norman.

All her barderie, however, did not suit the proud chief of Dunvegan, who
objected to the scope of the publicity he and his menage received at the
hands of the family nurse, exercising, as she freely did, the privileges
of the poet. And therefore he banished her to the island of Mull, under
the care of a relative.

But if one song sent her away, another brought her back. It was hard to
be exiled from Eilean-a-Cheo, and the castled seat of the clan, and so
seizing the opportunity which the advent of the young laird’s birthday
offered, she composed the now well-known “Luinneag Mhic Leoid,” or “Ode
to Macleod,” in which she presented a portrait so flattering that the
stubborn chief relented and sent a boat to bring her back, on condition
that henceforth she should no more exercise her gift of song. The
delighted poetess readily assented.

Yet even on the way from Mull to Skye she could not restrain the poetic
afflatus, and though for a time after her return she kept her word, as
Blackie says, “a bird is a bird and will sing”; and Mary Macleod, this
irrepressible daughter of the red-haired clansman, once more incurred
the displeasure of her chief by composing a new poem on the recovery of
his son from some illness; and in extenuation of the charge laid against
her, she naively maintained, “It is not a song; it is only a crònan,”
that is, a crooning.

The ode she produced in Mull in the days of dreary exile is one of the
finest of her poems; wild and beautiful, with a very peculiar charm. It
generally appears in all the best collections of Gaelic songs, and has
been translated into English verse both by Pattison and Blackie. The
rendering of the latter is, perhaps, the more euphonious, and brings out
better the repetition at the beginning of each stanza, as:—

                    I sit on a knoll,
                    All sorrowful and sad,
                    And I look on the grey sea
                    In mistiness clad,
                    And I brood on strange chances
                    That drifted me here,
                    Where Scarba and Jura
                    And Islay are near.

                    Where Scarba and Jura
                    And Islay are near;
                    Grand land of rough mountains,
                    I wish thee good cheer,
                    I wish young Sir Norman
                    On mainland and islands
                    To be named with proud honour,
                    First chief of the Highlands!

                    To be praised with proud honour
                    First chief of the Highlands,
                    For wisdom and valour,
                    In far and nigh lands;
                    For mettle and manhood
                    There’s none may compare
                    With the handsome Macleod
                    Of the princeliest air.

                    And the blood through his veins,
                    That so proudly doth fare,
                    From the old Kings of Lochlann
                    Flows richly and rare.
                    Each proud earl in Alba
                    Is knit with his line,
                    And Erin shakes hands with him
                    Over the brine.

                    And Erin shakes hands with him
                    Over the brine;
                    Brave son of brave father,
                    The pride of his line,
                    In camp and in council
                    Whose virtue was seen,
                    And his purse was as free
                    As his claymore was keen.

                           ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

                    With my heart I thee worship
                    Thou shapeliest Knight,
                    Wellgirt in the grace
                    Of the red and the white;
                    With an eye like the blaeberry
                    Blue on the brae,
                    And cheeks like the haws
                    On the hedge by the way.

                    With a cheek like the haws
                    On the hedge by the way,
                    ’Neath the rarest of locks
                    In rich curly display;
                    And the guest in thy hall
                    With glad cheer shall behold
                    Rich choice of rare armour
                    In brass and in gold, etc.

It needs some of Mary’s own imagination to picture her going about in
after days wearing a tartan _tonnag_, fastened in front with a large
silver brooch, and carrying a silver-headed cane. Hardy to a degree in
mind and constitution, the venerable nurse and poetess, when long past
the natural span of years, was much given, we are told, to gossip,
snuff, and whisky. After her death, which took place at Dunvegan in
1674, she was buried in her native isle of Harris.

Mackenzie of “The Beauties” appraised this quaint personage as the most
original of all our poets, who borrowed nothing. Her thoughts, her
verse, and rhymes were all equally her own; her language simple and
elegant; her diction easy, natural, and unaffected. There is no
straining to produce effect; no search after unintelligible words to
conceal the poverty of ideas. Her thoughts flow freely, and her
versification runs like a mountain stream over a smooth bed of polished
granite. She often repeats her rhymes, as in the above instance, yet we
never feel them tiresome or disagreeable, for, more than most of her
Gaelic compeers, Mary was mistress of the poetic lyre.

After her came another striking figure in the history of Highland bardic
literature. This was John Macdonald, the Lochaber poet, popularly known
as Iain Lom, probably from lack of hair either on his head or face, and
sometimes styled Iain Manntach, from an impediment in his speech.
Singular in these physical respects, he was no less remarkable for his
mental characteristics. A man of great force of character, he combined
in his personality the ardent poet and the keen politician, the
intuitive dreamer and the restless man of action.

Macdonald belonged to the Keppoch family, lived through the stirring
times of Charles I., Charles II., James II., the Revolution, and
subsequent reign of William and Mary, dying at an advanced age in 1710,
when Anne was on the throne.

This is the wonderful schemer whom some regard as the real genius of the
Montrose Campaign during the Civil War. Were it not for him, it is
certain, events could not have developed so favourably and so
brilliantly for the victorious Marquis as they did. Keen Jacobite as he
always was, he accompanied the latter on most of his marches, and it is
marvellous that the great Border minstrel, Sir Walter Scott, especially
in his account of the battle of Inverlochy in the _Legend of Montrose_,
makes no reference to him.

The Keppoch bard first came into prominence as a man to be reckoned
with, in connection with the murder of his chief, which, it is said he
foresaw, but was unable to avert. Sent abroad as a minor to be educated,
the heir of Keppoch was supplanted in his absence by his own faithless
and intriguing cousins, who murdered both him and his brother on their
return home. The dastardly crime rankled in the bosom of the fiery bard.
Among the faithless clansmen he alone remained fearlessly true to the
stricken family, and he determined to have revenge. “The Vow of Iain
Lom,” published in Mrs. D. Ogilvy’s _Highland Minstrelsy_, graphically
depicts his state of mind at the time. He went from house to house, and
castle to castle, calling for vengeance on the assassins, and having at
last obtained a commission from Government to take them dead or alive,
he first addressed himself to Glengarry, who declined the dangerous
task, and then to Sir Alexander Macdonald, who put a company of chosen
men at his disposal, the “Ciaran Mabach,” poet and soldier, at their
head.

Under the Keppoch bard’s directions the murderers were summarily
attacked and beheaded in their own barricaded house. A gruesome monument
of seven heads, representing those of the father and six sons, now marks
the well on Loch Oich side, known as _Tobar-nan-ceann_, where these
bleeding trophies are said to have been washed on their way to Glengarry
Castle, whence they were carried to Skye as a tribute to the Knight of
Sleat.

The bard has a poem on “Mort na Ceapach,” the murder of Keppoch; and
another entitled “A Bhean Leasaich,” in which he begins by praising Sir
Alexander Macdonald of Sleat and his son Sir James, evidently with the
intention of provoking Glengarry for his remissness in the matter of
retribution upon the usurpers. His own persecution by the traitors
furnished the poet with another theme. From this time he became a man of
mark in the Highlands, feared and respected. Though not a soldier
himself, when the Civil War broke out he identified himself with the
cause of the Stuarts, and was the means of bringing the armies of Argyll
and Montrose into deadly conflict at Inverlochy on February 2nd, 1645.
The wily John, a willing spectator, evaded taking a personal hand in the
encounter by the following ruse. When asked to make ready to march to
the fight, by the Macdonald commanding the Irish contingent, he slyly
replied, “If I go along with thee to-day, and fall in battle, who will
sing thy praises to-morrow? Go thou, Alasdair, and exert thyself as
usual, and I shall sing thy feats, and celebrate thy prowess in martial
strains.”

The result was that the bard feasted his eyes from a safe distance on
the disaster of the Campbells, with whom he was ever at feud, and moved
by all the passion and prejudice of the event composed the heroic
stanzas entitled, “The Battle of Inverlochy.” So realistic and graphic
is the description given in the original Gaelic that it seems to
photograph many of the details just as they happened. “The spirit of
poetry, the language, and boldness of expression,” says Mackenzie, with
perhaps the Celtic leaning to hyperbole, “have never been equalled.” Yet
to-day we read these vindictive strains with different feelings from
those that animated the bard.

A few verses may be quoted from the rendering of Professor Blackie,
which, though they lack the fire and intensity of the original, give a
good idea of the gist of the poem:—[33]

              Did you hear from Cille Cummin
              How the tide of war came pouring?
              Far and wide the summons travelled,
              How they drave the Whigs before them!

              From the Castle tower I viewed it
              High on Sunday morning early,
              Looked and saw the ordered battle
              Where Clan Donald triumphed rarely.

              Up the green slope of Cuil Eachaidh
              Came Clan Donald marching stoutly;
              Churls who laid my home in ashes,
              Now shall pay the fine devoutly!

                     ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

              Many a bravely mounted rider,
              With his back turned to the slaughter,
              Where his boots won’t keep him dry now,
              Learns to swim in Nevis water.

              On the wings of eager rumour
              Far and wide the tale is flying,
              How the slippery knaves, the Campbells,
              With their cloven skulls are lying!

              O’er the frosted moor they travelled,
              Stoutly with no thought of dying;
              Where now many a whey-faced lubber,
              To manure the fields is lying!

              From the height of Tom-na-harry
              See them crudely heaped together,
              In their eyes no hint of seeing,
              Stretched to rot upon the heather!

              Warm your welcome was at Lochy,
              With blows and buffets thickening round you,
              And Clan Donald’s groovèd claymore,
              Flashing terror to confound you!

              Hot and hotter grew the struggle
              Where the trenchant blade assailed them;
              Sprawled with nails on ground Clan Duiné,
              When the parted sinew failed them.

              Many a corpse upon the heather,
              Naked lay, once big with daring,
              From the battle’s hurly-burly,
              Drifting blindly to Blarchaorainn.

                     ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

              If I could, I would be weeping
              For your shame and for your sorrow,
              Orphans’ cry and widows’ wailing,
              Through the long Argyll to-morrow.

All this to the weird and exulting chorus:—

                    H-i rim h-ŏ-rò, h-ò-rò leatha,
                    H-i rim h-ŏ-rò, h-ò-rò leatha,
                    H-i rim h-ŏ-rò, h-ò-rò leatha,
                    Chaidh an la le Clann-Dòmhnuill.

His dangerous strategy and stinging sarcasm at length roused the Marquis
of Argyll to offer a reward for his head, and it is characteristic of
the impetuous John that he appeared in person in the audience-hall of
this mighty chief to claim it, relying for safety, no doubt, on the
sacred regard in which Highlanders always held the professional bard.
The Marquis received him courteously, and as they passed through a room
hung round with heads of moor-fowl, he asked him, “Have you ever seen,
John, so many black-cocks together?” “Yes,” he replied. “Where?” “At
Inverlochy.” “Ah! John,” muttered Argyll, “will you never cease gnawing
at the Campbells?” “I am only sorry,” added the implacable bard, “that I
cannot swallow them.”

For his services in the Stuart cause he was created Gaelic
poet-laureate, and received from Charles II. a yearly pension. Iain Lom
thus holds the unique distinction of having been the first and only
Gaelic poet-laureate. Altogether his poems would occupy a considerable
volume, though they have never been so issued.[34] Pattison has not
translated any, but Iain Lom has nevertheless obtained a well-merited
niche in Messrs. Blackie, the publishers, _Poets and Poetry of
Scotland_, 1876, compiled by James G. Wilson; and the romantic side of
his character is charmingly represented incidentally in Neil Munro’s
novel, entitled _John Splendid_.

Long after his death his Jacobite effusions still exercised a powerful
influence over his countrymen, counteracting in no small degree the
efforts of the Government to suppress the Stuart factions. “Children
were taught to lisp them,” says the _New Statistical Account of
Scotland_. “They were sung in the family circle on winter nights, and at
weddings, lykewakes, fairs, and in every company. They attributed to the
Stuarts and their adherents the most exalted virtues, and represented
their opponents as incarnate fiends. In 1745, Moidart and Kilmonivaig
were called ‘The Cradle of the Rebellion,’ and they were the very
districts where the songs of Iain Lom leavened the whole mass of society
with Jacobite sentiments.”

                   Mightier was the verse of Iain
                   Hearts to nerve, to kindle eyes,
                   Than the claymore of the valiant,
                   Than the counsel of the wise.

Contemporary with Iain Lom, and his confederate in bringing retribution
upon the Keppoch traitors, was a minor bard, known as Archibald
Macdonald, or “An Ciaran Mabach,” an illegitimate son of Sir Alexander
Macdonald, sixteenth baron of Sleat. In after life he lived in easy
circumstances, well adapted for the cultivation of his poetic tastes, on
an estate granted him in North Uist by his influential father, in return
for numerous services rendered as a sagacious and practical man of
affairs. Otherwise his life was uneventful and his poetry limited in
amount.

But the field held various other less prominent bards, for to this
period belonged several of those whose productions appear in the Fernaig
MS. of Duncan Macrae. Nor was the Highlands then lacking in poetesses.
Two at least figure in the record of the remembered.

Dorothy Brown, a native of Luing Island, Argyllshire, composed many
poems, of which perhaps that to Alasdair Maccolla is the only one now
extant, yet as a poetess she alone of women in that age approached the
standard of Mary Macleod.

Cicely Macdonald, her contemporary, was daughter of Ronald of Keppoch,
in youth a frolicsome maiden and clever at epigrams. Marrying a
gentleman of the Lovat family, she lived with him farther north, and
came to be known for her bardic gifts. Songs and laments were her chief
productions, but after her husband died at Inverness in a fit of
inebriety, she took to hymn-making. The names of her earlier pieces are
suggestive, such as: “Moràghach Mhic Shimidh,” “Slan gu bràth le ceòl na
clarsaich,” and “Alasdair a Glinne-Garaidh.” The latter beautiful one,
Mackenzie assures us, has served as a model for many Gaelic songs.

The next name in the succession is that of Nial Macvurich, family bard
and historian of Clanranald, distinguished also as a descendant, through
a long line of bardic ancestors, from the ancient and historic Muireach
Albannach, whose poetry figures in the Book of the Dean of Lismore. To
Nial we are indebted for the history of his illustrious clan, written in
Gaelic and preserved in the Red Book of Clanranald. But it is to be
regretted that of his own poems none is now extant, except two pieces
treasured in “The Beauties.” Solicitous to perpetuate the history and
ancient poetry of others, it appears that Nial took no thought for his
own to have them written down, and so they have mostly disappeared. He
lived to a great age, like the majority of these early Highland bards,
and was an old man living on his farm in South Uist at the time of the
first Jacobite rising in 1715.

Still another poet of Clanranald fame, John Macdonald, or Iain Dubh Mac
Iain ’Ic-Ailein, born about 1665, and resident in Eigg; and then we
reach the Aosdan Matheson, who was bard to the Earl of Seaforth in the
seventeenth century. Appurtenant to this post he held free lands in
Lochalsh, Ross-shire, and composed as many poems as would fill a large
volume, but most of these, like Nial Macvurich’s, and for the same
reason, have long been forgotten. One of those preserved has been very
freely rendered or imitated in English by Sir Walter Scott, under the
title “Farewell to Mackenzie, High Chief of Kintail,” 1815.

The original verses are arranged to a beautiful Gaelic air, of which the
chorus is adapted to the double pull upon the oars of a galley, and
which is therefore distinct from the ordinary boat-songs. They were
composed on the occasion of the embarking at Dornie, Kintail, of the
Earl of Seaforth, who was obliged to take refuge in Spain, after an
unsuccessful effort in favour of the old Chevalier in 1718. Sir Walter’s
version runs thus:—

      Farewell to Mackenneth, great Earl of the North,
      The Lord of Lochcarron, Glenshiel, and Seaforth;
      To the Chieftain this morning his course who began,
      Launching forth on the billow his bark like a swan.
      For a foreign land he has hoisted his sail,
      Farewell to Mackenzie, High Chief of Kintail!

      O swift be the galley, and hardy her crew,
      May her captain be skilful, her mariners true,
      In danger undaunted, unwearied by toil,
      Though the whirlwind should rise, and the ocean should boil;
      On the brave vessel’s gunnel, I drank his bonail,
      And farewell to Mackenzie, High Chief of Kintail!

      Awake in thy chamber, thou sweet southland gale!
      Like the sighs of his people, breathe soft on his sail;
      Be prolong’d as regret, that his vassals must know,
      Be fair as their faith, and sincere as their woe;
      Be so soft, and so fair, and so faithful, sweet gale,
      Wafting onward Mackenzie, High Chief of Kintail!

      Be his pilot experienced, and trusty, and wise,
      To measure the seas and to study the skies;
      May he hoist all his canvas from streamer to deck,
      But oh! crowd it higher when wafting him back—
      Till the cliffs of Skooroora, and Conan’s glad vale,
      Shall welcome Mackenzie, High Chief of Kintail!

Hector Maclean, of the same period, was bard to Sir Lachlan Maclean of
Duart, from whom he had a small annuity. Two poems of his, the “Chief’s
Elegy” and “Song,” are reckoned among the beauties of Gaelic poetry, and
have also attracted the attention of Sir Walter Scott, who translated or
imitated in the abrupt style of the original a fragment of the latter,
entitled “War-Song of Lachlan, High-Chief of Maclean.” This song, like
many of the early Gaelic productions, makes a rapid transition from one
subject to another. From the situation of a forlorn maiden of the clan,
who opens with an address to her absent lover, it passes finally to an
eulogium over the martial glories of the chieftain. Thus:—

               A weary month has wandered o’er
               Since last we parted on the shore;
               Heaven! that I saw thee, Love, once more,
               Safe on that shore again!
               ’Twas valiant Lachlan gave the word;
               Lachlan, of many a galley lord;
               He call’d his kindred bands on board,
               And launched them on the main.

               Clan Gillian is to ocean gone,
               Clan Gillian, fierce in foray known;
               Rejoicing in the glory won
               In many a bloody broil;
               For wide is heard the thundering fray,
               The rout, the ruin, the dismay,
               When from the twilight glens away
               Clan Gillian drives the spoil.

               Woe to the hills that shall rebound
               Our banner’d bagpipes’ maddening sound;
               Clan Gillian’s onset echoing round,
               Shall shake their inmost cell.
               Woe to the bark whose crew shall gaze
               Where Lachlan’s silken streamer plays!
               The fools might face the lightning’s blaze
               As wisely and as well!

Lachlan Mackinnon of Strath, Isle of Skye, is the next to figure in this
succession. Unlike so many of the others, he was not unlettered, nor
ignorant of such knowledge of the language as may be gleaned from a
critical study of its structure. Hence his Gaelic is wonderfully pure
and correct. In early life he filled the rôle of a strolling musician,
carrying his violin about with him from place to place, till certain
personal considerations obliged him to desist.

After him came a blind harper and a blind piper, both famous in Highland
minstrelsy. The harper was Roderick Morrison, son of an Episcopal
clergyman in the island of Lewis. He was born in the year 1646, and in
his boyhood had been sent along with his two brothers to be educated at
Inverness, all three having been destined by their father for the
ministry of the Church. But, unhappily, while there the youthful
islanders were seized with smallpox, which was then epidemic in the
town. His two brothers recovered from the effects of the dread scourge,
and afterwards became ministers, one at Contin, the other at Poolewe in
Ross-shire. Roderick himself was the chief sufferer, for not only was
his face disfigured and contracted, but he also lost the use of his
eyes. Incapacitated thus for a profession, he turned his attention to
music, and in addition to the skill he acquired in playing other
instruments, became an adept at the harp. Hence the name “An Clarsair
Dall,” by which he was generally known throughout the Highlands.

Visiting Ireland, it is thought he profited by tuition from his
fellow-harpers there, who had achieved fame in that form of minstrelsy;
and on his return to Scotland he took occasion to call at every baronial
residence on the way to exhibit his art. It so happened at the time that
many of the Scotch nobility and gentry were at the Court of King James
in Holyrood, Edinburgh, and thither the blind musician wended his way,
where he found an excellent friend in the person of the Highland
chieftain, John Breac Macleod of Harris, who readily engaged him as his
family harper.

While holding this office Morrison composed several beautiful tunes and
songs, living the life of a farmer at Totamòr in Glenelg, on a piece of
land which his patron granted him rent-free. On the death of the latter
he returned to his native island, and died there in a good old age, and
was buried in a country churchyard near Stornoway.

Morrison was a poet of power and culture. His elegy, “Creach nan
Ciadan,” on the chieftain who befriended him, is reckoned one of the
most pathetic, plaintive, and heart-touching of Highland laments.

The blind piper, John Mackay of Gairloch, was a contemporary, though
twenty years his junior. Like his father before him, who hailed from the
Reay country, this Mackay was born blind. Taught music first of all
under the paternal roof, he was sent later on to the Isle of Skye to
perfect his studies under the direction of the celebrated Mac Crimmon.
There he excelled all other pupils, and soon learned to compose
pipe-music himself. In fact, it is recorded that one of the Mac
Crimmons, jealous of his powers as a pipe-music composer, bribed some of
the youths to throw him over a precipice, which they did one day, the
blind stripling falling a distance of twenty-four feet, but without
physical hurt. The rock is still known as “Leum an Doill,” or “The Blind
Man’s Leap,” since he had the good fortune to land on his soles.

After seven years’ tuition in Skye he returned to his native parish,
succeeding his father as family piper to the Laird of Gairloch, and
subsequently marrying. Numerous pibrochs, strathspeys, reels, and jigs
are placed to his credit. When at length he was superannuated on a small
but competent annuity, the old man used to pass his time visiting
gentlemen’s houses in the Reay country and the island of Skye. On one of
these peregrinations in Sutherlandshire he composed the beautiful
pastoral “Coire an Easain,” lamenting Lord Reay. Of this poem Mackenzie
says, “It is not surpassed by anything of the kind in the Celtic
language—bold, majestic, and intrepid, it commands admiration at first
glance, and seems on a nearer survey of the entire magnificent fabric as
the work of some supernatural agent.” Could Highland admiration go
farther?

The “Piobaire Dall” lived till he was about ninety-eight years of age,
and sleeps with his father Ruairidh Dall within the clachan of his
native parish in the west.

Other minor bards of the period were, John Whyte, William Mackenzie,
John Maclean, Malcolm Maclean, the poet Macdonald of Muck, who composed
the “Massacre of Glencoe,” Angus Macdonald, Hector Macleod, Archibald
Macdonald, and Zachary Macaulay.

Archibald Macdonald excelled as a comic bard—one of the few that
Highland Gaeldom has produced. His “Elegy” on Roy while living—a piper
and favourite companion of his own—and his “Resurrection” of the same
individual, are counted very clever. He it was who composed the famous
satire, “Tha biodag air Mac Thomàis,” which, when played at a wedding
memorable in Highland history, ended so tragically for the player, and,
indeed, for Mac Thomàis himself, the alleged heir to the Lovat estates,
who had to fly from the country, and whose descendants have on more than
one occasion in recent times contested the right of the present Lovat
family to the ancient inheritance.

Tradition still pathetically relates how on that occasion, enraged at
the playing of the piece which so cleverly satirised himself, this young
Master of Lovat stabbed the bag of the piper, to silence it, with his
biodag, but the weapon entered the player’s heart also, and bag and
piper both collapsed with a mournful groan.

Zachary Macaulay is worthy of note on another account. From his family
was descended the brilliant Lord Macaulay, so famous in letters, and it
may very well have been from this source that the gifted essayist and
historian derived his vivid pictorial style. Zachary was born in the
island of Lewis early in the eighteenth century, and was the son of an
accomplished Episcopalian clergyman there. His productions as a poet
exhibit true bardic power, though he is believed in his youth to have
been given to writing wanton songs. The air of one of his popular pieces
was in after days a great favourite with Burns.

Two major bards remain to be noticed, who lived partly before and partly
after the Forty-five—John Maccodrum and Alexander Macdonald. The latter,
the more distinguished of the two, claims fuller mention hereafter.
Meanwhile, no more fitting subject might be found wherewith to conclude
this chapter than an account of the original and witty Maccodrum, with
examples of his poems.

Born in North Uist, he became in manhood bard to Sir James Macdonald of
Sleat, who died at Rome in 1766. It was a curious circumstance that
first commended him to the notice of this nobleman. The poet happened to
make a satire on the tailors of the Long Island, who were so exasperated
that they refused one and all to make him any clothing. Consequently he
went about for a time in tatters, and meeting Sir James one day, the
latter naturally inquired the reason why his trousers were so ragged.
Maccodrum explained, and was asked to repeat the offending verses. On
complying he was there and then promoted to be bard to the family, and
obtained, as was usual in such circumstances, free lands on the estate
for his maintenance.

A lively wit and biting sarcasm seem to have been characteristics of
Maccodrum’s Muse. Yet he could be very tender, as on the occasion when
he laments the untimely death of his patron, at the early age of
twenty-five. Then was the bard unusually serious and even pious:—

              As I awake it is not sleep
              That strives with me in troubles deep;
              My bed beneath the tears I weep
                  Is in disquiet;
                  My bed beneath, etc.

              Of him, my patron bright, bereft,
              I have no fair possession left;
              While pain of loss my soul has cleft
                  In sight and hearing;
                  While pain of loss, etc.

              Sore tears are ours; joy is no more,
              No hope of smiles; no cheer in store;
              We seem like the brave Fianns of yore
                  And Finn forsaken;
                  We seem like the brave Fianns, etc.

              Ah! true it seems the tale to tell;
              Our cup is filled with doings fell;
              Provoking in a rage of hell
                  Bless’d God the Highest;
                  Provoking in a rage, etc.

              Blest One, from Thee let us not swerve;
              Above with Thee he goes to serve;
              O Christ! do Thou for us preserve
                  Our loving brothers;
                  O Christ! do thou for us preserve, etc.

Maccodrum was deemed a witness of no mean weight in the Ossianic
controversy, on the strength of the following statement by Sir James
Macdonald, in a letter dated from Skye, October 10th, 1763. Addressing
Dr. Blair, on that occasion he writes: “The few bards that are left
among us repeat only detached pieces of the Ossianic poems. I have often
heard them and understood them, particularly from one man, called John
Maccodrum, who lives on my estate in North Uist. I have heard him repeat
for hours together poems which seemed to me to be the same with
Macpherson’s translations.”

The bard once met the hero of Ossianic fame when the latter had gone to
the Outer Hebrides to collect fragments of ancient poetry. From
Lochmaddy, Macpherson happened to be travelling across the moor towards
the seat of the younger Clanranald of Benbencula, and falling in with a
native, he took occasion to ask him if he had anything on the Feinn.
This man, who was none other than the quick-witted and sarcastic
Maccodrum, taking advantage of Macpherson’s badly expressed and
ambiguous Gaelic, retorted literally to the effect that the Feinn did
not owe him anything, and even if they did, it were vain to ask for
payment now. Unaware of the personality of the bard, and direly offended
at the character of the reply, which reflected on his own knowledge of
the language, the proud collector passed on his way without more ado.
Both men thus met and parted as ignorant of each other as ships that
pass in the night.

Maccodrum’s poems have never been published separately. A few appeared
in Alexander Macdonald’s collection. Many of the rest, entrusted to
memory, are now merged in oblivion. He had not the versatility either of
Mary Macleod or of Alexander Macdonald, for he sometimes imitates the
poems of bards more original than himself, yet in purity and elegance of
language he frequently approaches Macdonald. His satire on “Donald
Bain’s Bagpipe,” and his poems on “Old Age” and “Whisky,” are considered
excellent, witty, ingenious, and original. And “Smeorach
Chlann-Domhnuill,” or “The Mavis of Clan Donald,” which has been
rendered into English verse by Professor Blackie, is a delightful pæan
in praise of his own native Uist.

         The Mavis of Pabal am I; in my nest
         I lay long time with my head on my breast,
         Dozing away the dreary hour,
         In the day that was dark, and the time that was sour.

         But now I soar to the mountain’s crest,
         For the chief is returned whom I love best;
         In the face of the sun, on the fringe of the wood,
         Feeding myself with wealth of good.

         On the tip of the twigs I sit and sing,
         And greet the morn on dewy wing,
         And fling to the breeze my dewy note,
         With no ban to my breath, and no dust in my throat.

         Every bird will praise its own nest,
         And why shall not I think mine the best?
         Land of strong men and healthy food,
         And kindly cheer, and manners good.

         A land that faces the ocean wild,
         But with summer sweetness, mellow and mild,
         Calves, lambs, and kids, full many a score,
         Bread, milk, and honey piled in the store.

         A dappled land full sunny and warm,
         Secure and sheltered from the storm,
         With ducks and geese and ponds not scanted,
         And food for all that live to want it, etc.

The poet, apparently, made the most of his own rugged island, and now
lies buried in an old churchyard not far from the village of Houghary,
where a rough boulder of gneiss, of uneven, battered surface, spotted
with nodules, but without any inscription, marks his grave. He himself,
while living, had picked it out from the beach and destined it for this
purpose.

The Highland bards before the Forty-five were thus a goodly company, and
they had this in common, that they were independent for the most part of
writing, in some cases even of education; yet they had a wonderful
command of their native Gaelic, and an extraordinary ear for the
beauties of sound that may be expressed through the medium of language.
They were all more or less attached to chiefs, whose praises they sang,
and almost without exception these early bards lived into an extreme old
age, and died in the land they had never left, and among the friends
they had never forsaken.




                               CHAPTER XV
            THE INFLUENCE OF THE CHURCH ON GAELIC LITERATURE

  The origins of Celtic literature—Two streams—The Pagan—The
      Christian—Influence of the early Celtic Church as patron of
      letters—Originates a written literature—Attitude towards the
      ancient sagas—Medieval obscurantism—The Dialogues between Ossian
      and Patrick quoted and discussed—Their significance—Bishop
      Carsewell and the Reformation—The rival influences of Naturalism
      and the Church—Decline of Gaelic oral literature—The Nineteenth, a
      century of gleaning rather than of great creative
      work—Reasons—Present-day return to nature—Splendid services of
      individual Churchmen.


As we work our way back through history towards the origins of Celtic
literature, we recognise two streams issuing from two very different
sources. One has its rise in pre-Christian times, welling up from the
pagan heart of the race from a remote antiquity. It is represented by
the sagas and the poetry that is mingled with them. These sagas breathe
the spirit of the Celtic people in the long past, and are the most
characteristic of all their literary products. So old are they, that
very few of them deal with events posterior to the eighth century, and
those that do are the less meritorious.

In this respect it may be said that the Celts produced their best
literature first. This literature was long in coming to the birth. It
took centuries to evolve. But when it did appear it proved a new
creation. The mind of a people lived in it, spoke through its tales.
Generations of ancestors, lost and speechless in the slumber of the
ages, found in it life and utterance.

So far as this stream has gained in volume through its course down the
centuries, it has done so by expansion. Each succeeding age harks back
to the past and draws from the original, imitating and transcribing,
until now in the great books of sagas and modern literature thereon, we
have a mighty river of Gaelic lore.

Yet nothing so original, nothing so characteristic in this line has ever
been added to the early contribution. The Celtic genius seems to have
found its fullest and most distinctive expression then, in the days
before writing, and before Christianity was introduced, and ever since
it has been drawing inspiration from its oldest creations.

Take away this stream, and the peculiar interest of Celtic literature is
gone. How many centuries the sagas were in the making before they took
final shape as we read them, can never be known. They passed from
generation to generation by oral delivery, and it was only in the
seventh or eighth century of our era that they ultimately found
embodiment in writing. This much can be inferred, though we have no
copies earlier than the end of the eleventh century and middle of the
twelfth, those from which these latter drew their texts having perished
long ago.

But as this stream flowed on from a past as remote and mysterious as the
sources of the Nile were in the days of Herodotus, suddenly a new and
independent one takes its rise. And this latter stream can be traced to
its source in the fifth century of our era. It emanated not, as in the
other case, from the pagan heart of the race in its more primitive
phase, but in that heart overtaken and surprised by the new doctrines of
Christianity.

This was really a new departure—a new beginning. The two streams had
little in common. In essence and colour they seemed as if they belonged
to two different worlds, which indeed was the case, in point of outlook
and underlying thought.

As literature the old was better. It represented the real quintessence
of the Celtic genius before it was diverted into new channels. And this
is what makes critics like M. Darmesteter, while fully admitting the
glorious significance of the new stream as a literary renaissance, yet
consider it a decadence in contrast with the earlier.

For all this, the far-reaching significance of the new creation must not
be lost sight of. It is probable that even then the ancient stream had
reached its full flood, and but for the advent of the latter, which came
with the new thought, it may have gradually subsided with the old order
and never have found a way to posterity.

Historically, then, it is with the introduction of Christianity that
Celtic literature first finds its embodiment, and when we consider the
condition of continental Europe at the time, this early beginning in the
writing of books is quite marvellous. It is to the Church, therefore, in
the person of its missionary pioneers, that we owe the initial force
that resulted in a written Gaelic literature.

In bringing Christianity to bear on the old pagan life and thought of
the race, the missionaries effected a reanimation, which brought latent
powers into action in a new direction. They furnished the people with
fresh ideas, new material for thought, and an entirely changed outlook.
The movement, indeed, might be described as the passage from Celtic
naturalism to Christian spiritualism. And when we consider what the old
paganism really was in many of its features, this emancipation cannot be
regarded in any other light than that in which history uniformly regards
it, as a salvation of the country, preparing the way for the realisation
of all those grand possibilities that lay in the future.

With the coming of St. Patrick Ireland entered upon a new epoch, and
with the advent of St. Columba the political and literary history of
Scotland may be said to have begun. Every credit is due to the Church,
therefore, as the importer and originator of a written literature, as
well as of a true religion. To it we owe the remarkable arrival of
letters which not only tapped a new fountain head, causing a new stream
of literary composition to flow, but which also secured for us the
preservation and continuance of the old to this day.

“Few forms of Christianity,” wrote Renan, “have offered an ideal of
Christian perfection so pure as the Celtic Church of the sixth, seventh,
and eighth centuries. Nowhere, perhaps, has God been better worshipped
in spirit than in those great monastic communities of Hy or Iona, of
Bangor, of Clonard, or of Lindisfarne.”

And it is this purity of motive and sincerity of purpose that led the
early missionaries, in contrast to the obscurantists of later ages, to
recognise the high value of literature and use it in the service of
religion. In the primitive Celtic Church we find no conflict between the
two, such as the sickly piety of some more modern periods has instituted
and maintained. Learning and culture were then never regarded as enemies
to religion. On the contrary, they were deemed not only helpful, but
even indispensable to the progress of Christianity in the land. And they
were encouraged as such. They were the most powerful agents for the
removal of racial ignorance, superstition, and prejudice.

All honour, therefore, to the Church that first kindled the lamp of
literature and the love of knowledge in these once dark islands.

The attitude of this early Celtic Church towards the original oral
traditions and compositions of the people was perfectly consistent, and
can be easily understood. It simply ignored them as far as that was
possible, offering in their stead a substitute infinitely better fitted,
as it thought, to elevate the life and character of these pagan peoples.

With a zeal that is entirely praiseworthy, it set itself to the
multiplication of copies of the Psalter, of the Gospels, and other parts
of Scripture. It is really marvellous, when we consider that these had
to be patiently and laboriously and beautifully handwritten, how much
was accomplished in this way by the early missionaries. St. Columba
alone was credited with having written “three hundred gifted, lasting,
illuminated, noble books,” all of them transcriptions of some portions
of the Bible, no doubt.

It is this which accounts for the fact that almost all the existing
literary monuments of the early Celtic Church are copies of the Gospels
or of the Psalter, with or without Gaelic or Latin glosses.

Thus the “Domhnach Airgid,” the “Cathrach,” the Books of Durrow, Dimna,
Kells, Molling, Armagh, Deer, the “Gospel of Maeielbrid Macdurnain,” the
“Psalter of Southampton,” with correlative books like the “Irish Canons”
and “Missal of Stowe,” in the British Islands, besides those on the
Continent.

It is significant that the missionaries used the Latin versions of the
Scriptures rather than Greek or Hebrew ones, with the reading and
writing of which latter they seemed to have been less familiar. They did
not attempt, so far as we know, to make a Gaelic translation of the
original, but contented themselves, no doubt, with rendering from Latin
into the Gaelic in course of their preachings and expositions.

One thing is evident, that these scholarly men had no aversion to
textual criticism or any fear of it, like so many of their Highland and
Irish successors to-day, for they freely indulged in it for their own
and the popular benefit. Thus the Celtic Church of Scotland and Ireland
had Jerome’s recension of the Vulgate almost as soon as it was issued,
and, to judge from the youthful Columba and his master St. Finnian’s
avidity for it, welcomed it with great enthusiasm. And more than that,
the Celtic Church appears to have collated Jerome’s text with older
native texts of their own, to make if possible even a better version,
such as they might use in all their monasteries, and such as we find to
this day in most of their great books of Gospel, as quoted above.

But in the same way that Knox unfortunately found it expedient to
destroy many beautiful buildings, books, and customs of the Roman
Catholic Church at the time of the Reformation, so the early Celtic
Church in conflict with an ancient and debasing paganism felt it
necessary, while tolerating many ancient customs and superstitions, to
resist the leaven of heathenism in every shade and form, and thus even
to ignore the compositions which breathed so freely its spirit and
atmosphere.

There is a high probability that the best minds felt the hardship of
having to turn their backs upon the most beautiful of these literary
products of their race. For example, in the “Dialogue of the Sages,”
found in the Book of Lismore, it is recorded that St. Patrick himself
felt rather uneasy at the delight with which he listened to the stories
of the ancient Feinn, and feared it might be wrong in him to enjoy or
show his appreciation of those pagan narratives, yet when he consulted
his guardian angels, they not only assured him that there was no harm in
listening to the tales, but even counselled him to have them written
down in the words of ollamhs, “for,” said they, “it will be a rejoicing
to numbers and to the good people to the end of time to listen to these
stories.”

The missionaries appear to have been too earnest and consistent in their
struggle with the gnarled roots of paganism to indulge their taste in
writing what they could not help admiring as tales of great literary
beauty, and very fascinating. And so for two or three centuries, though
the cultivation of writing and bardic compositions went steadily on,
none of the ancient pagan products found patrons sufficiently literary
to commit them to MSS.

The new school followed a style and trend of its own, and in addition to
endless transcribing, produced Latin prose works of its own, prominent
among which may be mentioned St. Patrick’s _Confession_, and “Epistle to
Coroticus,” Cummene’s and Adamnan’s _Lives of St. Columba_, Brendan’s
_Navigatio_ or _Voyaging_, each of which have had a wide vogue
throughout the Middle Ages, and since.

Among its Gaelic contributions are many beautiful poems, some of ancient
renown, on account of their theme or author, such as Dallan Forgaill’s
_Amra Choluimcille_, St. Columba’s own numerous lyrics—that on Derry, on
Cormac’s visit, his “Farewell to Ara,” all breathing love of nature and
affection for home.

Then we have the verses of Cennfaelad, who died in 678; Aengus the
Culdee’s “Feilire,” or Calendar, about 800; the poems in the Monastery
of St. Paul, Carinthia; and the verses in the Codex Boernerianus; the
“Saltair na Rann,” about the year 1000, a collection of 162 poems in
early middle Irish.

Of hymns and prayers, both in Gaelic and Latin—compositions of the early
Celtic Church—there is no lack. The most famous of the Latin ones are
those of Sechnall (on St. Patrick) and of Columcille (“The Altus,” “In
te Christo,” and “Noli Pater”); and of the Gaelic ones, St. Patrick’s
“Deer’s Cry,” Colman’s and Fiacc’s hymns, “Ninine’s Prayer,” Ultan’s and
Broccan’s hymns, both in praise of Brigit, “Adamnan’s Prayer,” and the
hymns of Sanctain and Mael-isu.

When to these we add specimens of homiletic literature and “Cormac’s
Glossary” (Cormac, King-Bishop of Cashel, 837–903), which is reckoned by
far the oldest attempt at a comparative vernacular dictionary made in
any language of modern Europe, and the same author’s “Saltair of
Cashel,” we have a very fair representation of what the new literature
initiated by the monks and missionaries contained.

It is mainly a religious literature, as contrasted with the purely pagan
war-stories and romances of the heroes. This ethical movement for a time
tended to supplant the natural spontaneous poetical output of the race,
yet it could not crush out these older creations, which were independent
of books and MSS., and as intense in feeling and true to nature as
anything which the classical literatures contain.

And so in course of time there came a reaction. The votaries of
naturalism so far triumphed in their zeal for the ancient sagas and
romances, that they began to have them written down. Zimmer thinks that
the earliest redaction of the “Táin Bó Chuailgné” dates from the seventh
century. But it is difficult to ascertain when the sagas first found
embodiment in ink. The interest in them appears to have been revived
immediately before or at the time when the Norsemen arrived and were
devastating the country. The devotion of the latter to the
characteristic sagas of their own race and nation may have quickened the
enthusiasm of the Gael for his own. And the new atmosphere which this
rough pagan element introduced to the land, breaking for a time the
influence and sway of the Church and of the men of learning in the
monasteries, may have conduced further to bring into popular favour the
old heroic war-poetry, nerving the heart of the people to withstand the
onslaught of the invader in the spirit of the dead heroes.

Christianity suffered eclipse for a while, and with it the interests of
learning and the religious literature, cultivated so assiduously in the
monasteries.

By the time that the sagas had come to be written down, the old feeling
which had prompted the early missionaries to ignore them was apparently
giving way, since there were scribes within the Church eager to commit
them to MS. This was a natural and inevitable reaction.

But monastic Christianity, ever on its guard against nature, was
constantly seeking after the strange and paradoxical. For it, abstinence
was worth more than enjoyment, happiness must be sought in its opposite.
And so there sprung up afresh, this time a more blind and uncompromising
orthodox antagonism to the early paganism and all its creations.

The Dialogues between Ossian and Patrick are our witness. These, while
professing to bring the spirit of paganism and of early Christianity
together in the person of the last great representative of the one and
the first of the other, were evidently the work of monkish scribes in
the twelfth century or earlier, and they throw a significant sidelight
on the situation. In reality they reflect the posture of affairs, not as
it was in the early days when Christianity was first introduced, but as
it existed later, when ecclesiastical doctrines had taken on their more
lurid, medieval colour.

In form and setting the Dialogues are the nearest approach to a drama
that the Gael has ever produced. And Miss Hull thinks that they were
designed simply to popularise the ancient tales. But such a view seems
to us to miss the whole aim and point of these compositions, which are
clearly the undisguised result of a reaction,—nay, even revolt in the
minds of thoughtful and patriotic men, monks or clerics or laymen,
against the narrow and captious spirit that can see no good in any form
of natural life and religion other than the contracted faith in which it
was itself reared.

Evidently the Church had descended from the high level of faith and
policy it had maintained in the days of St. Patrick and St. Columba, and
measures which the latter had found necessary as temporary expedients
till the need for them had vanished, smaller minds had elevated into
principles; and even the simple tenets of Christianity they had
distorted by casting them into an ecclesiastical mould, and opposing
them to the most natural instincts and enthusiasms of the human heart.

The writers of the Dialogues, we can see, are thoroughly in earnest, and
not sparing in their irony and banter of the grim theology which found
no place for the natural virtues of the Celts, or for the story of the
dreams and ideals of a thousand years. A mocking, derisive humour runs
through these pieces, but the humour is all on one side. There can be no
mistaking the sympathies of the writers, who themselves are
intellectually emancipated from the narrow tenets and intolerant spirit
that would consign the heroes without reflection and without scruple to
endless pain.

In these Dialogues paganism at its best is brought face to face with
ecclesiastical Christianity, and is made to appear more just, more
humane, and desirable in every way.

To the spirit of these conversations, or to the form in which they are
cast, no exception can reasonably be taken. In one respect only might
students of history dissent, and that is, to the selection of St.
Patrick as spokesman for the bigotry that is here pilloried.

Those who are familiar with the authentic records of his life and the
spirit of his teaching will feel that an injustice is done the apostle
of Ireland, by associating his name with such counterfeit sentiment. Had
a typical medieval monk or cleric been selected as advocate of the
repulsive theology represented here, the rôle would have been more true
to life and historical fact. As it is, one feels that a noble character
is traduced and put in a false setting. These Dialogues are profoundly
interesting, not only because of the struggle between nature and dogma,
between the cosmic process and the ethical, here brought into
irreconcilable antagonism, but also because the two original and
independent streams of Gaelic literature seem here to meet, and, like
the rushing together of contrary tides or of two confluent currents, to
mingle their waters together in a wild tumult of angry waves, which only
subsides as each again gradually finds its own channel.

One of the most interesting of the Dialogues is that which is known as
“Ossian’s Prayer,” and is about 150 lines in length. The bard begins by
asking the saint if the Feinn of Erin are in heaven. When he is informed
that his father, Gaul, and Oscar cannot be there, he not unnaturally
retorts, “If Erin’s Feinn are not in heaven, why should I Christian be?”
Thereupon the saint taunts him with irreverent fierceness of language,
adding “What are all the Feinn of Erin to one hour with God alone?” But
Ossian declares he would prefer to see one battle waged by the valiant
Feinn than to see the Lord of Heaven and his cleric (Patrick) chanting
sin.

The saint tries to impress him with God’s omniscience by telling him in
effect that it would be impossible for the smallest midge to enter
heaven without God’s knowledge. “How different from Finn,” exclaims the
bard, “thousands might enter, partake of his cheer, and depart without
notice.”

The argument throughout shows complete divergence in their thought.

“Finn is in hell in bonds,” says Patrick. “He is now in the house of
pain and sorrow, because of the amusement he had with the hounds and for
attending the (bardic) schools each day, and because he took no heed of
God.” And to an interpolation of Ossian, “Misery attend thee, old man,”
he continues, “who speakest words of madness; God is better for one hour
than all the Fenians of Erin.”

To which the bard retorts, “O Patrick, who makest me that impertinent
answer, thy crozier would be in atoms were Oscar present. Were my son
Oscar and God hand in hand on Knock-na-veen, if I saw my son down, it is
then I would say that God was a strong man.

“How could it be that God and his clerics could be better men than Finn,
the chief king of the Fenians, the generous one, who was without
blemish? All the qualities that you and your clerics say are according
to the rule of the King of the Stars, Finn’s Fenians had them all, and
they must be now stoutly seated in God’s heaven. Were there a place
above or below better than heaven, ’tis there Finn would go and all the
Fenians he had.”

Baffled in his attempt to initiate the pagan into his new doctrines, and
curious to hear, Patrick relents and calls for a tale. The following is
an example of the usual metre of the original mellifluous Gaelic:—

               Ossian, sweet to me thy voice,
               Now blessings choice on the soul of Finn,
               But tell to me how many deer
               Were slain at Slieve-na-man-finn.

And warming to the task, the bard recites the glorious character and
deeds of the vanished heroes. “The Fenians never used to tell untruth.
There never sat cleric in church, though melodiously ye may think they
chant psalms, more true to his word than the Fenians, the men who shrank
never from fierce conflicts.” And then when he adds, “I never heard that
any feat was performed by the King of the saints, or that _He_ reddened
his hand,” the exasperated and dogmatic Patrick stops him short with the
assertion, “Let us cease disputing on both sides, thou withered old man,
who art devoid of sense; understand that God dwells in heaven of the
orders, and Finn and his hosts are all in pain.” Ossian, pathetically,
“Great then would be the shame for God not to release Finn from the
shackles of pain; for if God himself were in bonds, my chief would fight
on his behalf. Finn never suffered in his day any one to be in pain or
difficulty without redeeming him by silver or gold, or by battle and
fight, until he was victorious.

“It is a good claim I have against your God, I to be among these clerics
as I am, without food, without clothing or music, without bestowing gold
on bards, without battling, without hunting, etc.” The idea of his
well-meaning instructors was to starve the bard into submission, in the
intolerant spirit of the Inquisition of later times, or of boycotting in
more modern days.

Elsewhere the bewildered Ossian laments as follows:—

“Alas, O Patrick, I did think that God would not be angered thereat; I
think long, and it is a great woe to me, not to speak of the way of Finn
of the Deeds.” To which Patrick: “Speak not of Finn nor of the Fenians,
for the Son of God will be angry with thee for it. He would never let
thee into his court, and He would not send thee the bread of each day.”

“I will, O Patrick, do his will. Of Finn or of the Fenians I will not
talk, for fear of bringing anger upon them, O cleric, if it is God’s
wont to be angry.”

Mingled with these arguments are passages which quiver with the Gaelic
enthusiastic love of nature. In _Finn’s Pastimes_, for example, we have
a lyric of extraordinary beauty. After a couple of verses addressed to
his opponent, ending, “Can his doom be in hell, in _the house of cold_?”
Ossian goes on to tell of his father’s delight in nature. The passage is
held to be in the very best style, rhyme, rhythm, and assonance, all
combined with a most rich vocabulary of words expressive of sounds,
nearly impossible to translate into English. But we quote from Dr.
Sigerson’s beautiful rendering of the original:—

                The tuneful tumult of that bird,
                The belling deer on ferny steep;
                This welcome in the dawn he heard,
                These soothed at eve his sleep.

                Dear to him the wind-loved heath,
                The whirr of wings, the rustling brake;
                Dear the murmuring glens beneath,
                And sob of Droma’s lake.

                The cry of hounds at early morn,
                The pattering deer, the pebbly creek,
                The cuckoo’s call, the sounding horn,
                The swooping eagle’s shriek.

These Dialogues are quoted at some length, because they bring into clear
outline permanent tendencies—the rival influences of naturalism and the
Church—Celtic literature struggling to be free, and the Church seeking
to saturate it with its own sentiment, and use it solely for its own
propaganda. That is the history down to this day. Nature, love, and war
on the one side, and religious themes on the other. The one timid of the
other, and each on its guard against the undue ascendency of its rival.

Thus it is assumed that James Macpherson ignored these ancient
compositions, namely, the Dialogues, as modern and counterfeit, because
of the intrusion of the ecclesiastical element into the purely pagan
domain. Into none of his own so-called translations did he admit any
flavour of Christianity, regarding that only as the genuine and original
Ossianic residuum which breathed the spirit of pre-Christian times.

But he lived in the days before textual criticism. We cannot credit the
Church as a whole with disinterested love of literature and its
encouragement. But in every age there have been men within its fold who
were passionately devoting themselves to authorship on their own
account, and to the preservation of books and MSS., and literary lore of
the past. Every monastery in the Middle Ages was thus more or less a
place in which reading and writing were cultivated, and some were active
centres of literary work. So that indirectly, and especially in
troublous times, we owe to the Church the splendid heritage of a Gaelic
literature continuous from the days of St. Patrick and St Columba to our
own. Down to very recent times, in fact, the men connected with
religious institutions have been the real custodiers, if not always
themselves the authors, of Gaelic productions. Thus it was Maelmuiri in
Clonmacnois that enriched posterity with the wonderful Leabhar Na
h’Uidhre, while his contemporary did for the hymns in the _Liber
Hymnorum_ what he so bravely and intelligently did for the sagas. From
their time the fatuous hostility to the sagas had evidently broken down.
Perhaps the Dialogues between Ossian and Patrick had been as effective
in their own way in pouring ridicule and contempt upon the opposing
faction as the poems of Burns in withering the hyper-orthodox tyranny of
later times. At any rate, from the monasteries of Ireland in these
Middle Ages came the great books of sagas and romance, such as the Books
of Leinster, Ballymote, Lecain, Lismore, etc.; and in Scotland in the
corresponding period we have the Glenmasan MS. of the thirteenth
century; MS. XL. of the fourteenth; and, besides others, the great Book
of the Dean of Lismore, which covers the period down almost to the
Reformation in Scotland.

But with the Reformation the old spirit of mistaken evangelical zeal
against the ancient heroic literature seems to have revived in an
aggressive form, for we find no less a man than Bishop Carswell, the
most representative Churchman in the Highlands of that age, inveighing
against the popularity of the sagas. In the epistle to the reader, which
he prefixed to Knox’s Liturgy, the first book printed in Gaelic, he
says:—

  And great is the blindness and sinful darkness and ignorance and
  perverseness of those who teach and write and compose in Gaelic, that
  with the view of obtaining for themselves the vain rewards of this
  world, they are more desirous, and more accustomed to preserve the
  vain, extravagant, false, and worldly histories concerning the Tuath
  de Dananns and Milesians, Fionn, the son of Cumhail, and his heroes
  the Feinn, and many others, which I shall not here mention, nor
  attempt to examine, than they are to write, and to teach, and to
  compose the sincere words of God and the perfect way of truth. For the
  world loves falsehood more than the truth, and as a proof of it,
  worldly sinful men will pay for falsehood, and will not listen to the
  truth though they have it for nothing.

  A great portion of the darkness and ignorance of such persons arises,
  too, from the aforesaid truths not being taught in good books,
  understood by all who speak the general language or habitual Gaelic
  tongue.

This was a volte-face from the sympathetic attitude of the Dean of
Lismore, and no doubt included him in its sweeping indictment. Yet we
may take it as representing the attitude of the leaders of the
Reformation towards the literature as well as the beliefs and cults
tolerated by the Latin Church. For a time the great evangelical
movement, which had spread from Germany over England and Scotland, had
little effect in the Highlands. The people remained widely indifferent
to religious influences of every kind, except such lingering influence
as the Roman Catholic Church continued to exert upon them; but when at
length they came once more under the influence of evangelical preachers,
like Robert Bruce and others, the precedent set by Carsewell and the
reformers seems to have been less or more uniformly followed; and with
every revival of clerical authority there appeared an unmistakable
tendency towards a revival of clerical intolerance, painfully
detrimental to wholesome literature, as well as to music, athletic
sports, and amusements of every kind.

Consequently since the Reformation Gaelic oral literature has been
gradually disappearing, until, in the words of Mr. Alexander Carmichael,
“it is now becoming meagre in quantity, inferior in quality, and greatly
isolated.”

In his own collection, which represents the latest gleaning in this
field of Gaelic lore, we see the influence of the Church and the old
pagan traditions strangely intermingled. The very title, “Hymns and
Incantations,” suggests the double influence, the two streams which have
been running parallel, approaching each other, mingling and separating
all through Celtic literature.

However much the Church may have gained the ascendency over rival
influences, it has never been able to stifle the heroic poetry of the
race. At periods when the latter seemed most to have gone under, and
disappeared beneath the ban of religion, it came to life again with
amazing vitality, as, for example, in the days of Maelmuiri and after,
when the ecclesiastical seemed to have conquered the pagan; and again in
the days of Macpherson, when the Reformation appeared to have made a
clean sweep of the heroic saga in the land, leaving neither name nor
memorial. And the MSS. had so completely disappeared that they were not
known to exist.

But forth they came to testify once more to the hidden and precarious
genius of the Celtic people, which produced such diverse characters as
Fergus and Ossian, Patrick and Columcille.

While the nineteenth century has been exceptionally brilliant in the
department of English literature, the same cannot be said of Gaelic
literature. In the former great works of creative genius have appeared,
which have added immense lustre to the language in which they were
conceived. In the latter the output by comparison has been very poor and
meagre, no lengthy sustained production of any originality having seen
the light either in prose or poetry. It would seem as if the genius of
the Gaelic language had found more congenial expression in English, for
not a few of those who have enriched the younger literature, from Sir
Walter Scott onwards to William Black and Robert Buchanan, have derived
their inspiration, and sometimes their themes, from Celtic sources. Of
native compositions we have nothing to show beyond elegies, songs, and
lyrics, some of them of great beauty, and as spontaneous and true to
nature as the beating of men’s hearts. But no epic, no heroic poetry, no
drama, no great prose work worthy to be classed with the masterpieces of
English literature, or even with the minor works, has appeared within
the last century. Instead of being a century of creative work, as in
English, it has rather been a century of gleaning. All the best works in
Gaelic are collections—gleanings from the past.

It would be difficult to assign the real reason for the barrenness of
production in recent times. Many causes seem to combine. The derelict
condition of the Highland and Irish populations in the beginning of last
century may have had something to do with it; the decline and limited
use of the language; the invasion of English and English literature, of
Lowland people and Lowland ways.

Gleaners and native lovers of Celtic literature generally ascribe a
large share of the decadence to the influence and attitude of the Church
in its local testimony. During the greater part of last century,
especially in the Highlands, that influence has been such that, had the
Dialogues been produced any time within that period, they would have hit
the mark quite as surely as in the age in which they were written, if we
conceived St Patrick as orthodox cleric and Ossian as the native genius
of the Celtic people.

But times have changed. The lights and shadows on the canvas have again
shifted. Our modern habits of thought are different. Like Ossian, men
look askance on morbid teaching, and have no great enthusiasm for
unnatural asceticism. The prevailing theory of life, impatient of
ethical dualism, objects to the identification of nature with evil quite
as much as the bard did. If nature is not evil, it asks, where, then, is
the necessity or the benefit of a renunciation which is incompatible
with the conditions under which men have to exist? And so, concurrent
with the decadence of ecclesiastical ideas and ecclesiastical authority,
there is a return to nature; and in many quarters a fresh interest is
being taken in the language, literature, and lore of the Gael. And new
writers have arisen who breathe the spirit of the race, and voice its
longings, yearnings, strivings, free from theological bias.

Their medium is no longer the Gaelic, but the English, into which they
have carried many quaint idioms, sentiments, and expressions. Indeed it
is doubtful if ever the Gaelic will again adapt itself to any great
literary work, since the gifted have adopted English as the more
comprehensive vehicle.

Yet now, looking dispassionately over the vicissitudes of Gaelic
literature from the time it was first cradled in the rough bosom of the
race, and nurtured by Christianity, we cannot forget the splendid
services rendered by monks and Churchmen in the early days and during
the Middle Ages down to the Reformation. Adverse periods of obscurantism
there have been, blighting enough and painfully retrograde. But for ages
the Church figured as the patron of letters, and even in later times
there have been enthusiastic literary workers within its pale. In
Scotland men like Sage, Macnicol, Smith, Maccallum, Drs. Norman Macleod,
Macdonald, Clerk, Maclauchlan, Cameron, Dowden, Henderson, and Macneill;
in Ireland Drs. Reeves, Todd, Wright, Stokes, and many others.

And taking the influence of the Church at its best, we may surely apply
to it, in its relation to literature, the remark of Dean Church in a
wider connection: “History teaches us this, that in tracing back the
course of human improvement, we come in one case after another upon
Christianity as the source from which improvement derived its principle
and its motive. We find no other source adequate to account for the new
spring of amendment, and without it no other source of good could have
been relied on.”

So here Christianity, through its medium, the Church, besides saving the
soul of a departing oral literature, has been the fruitful spring and
inspiration of much that is beautiful, pure, and enduring in our Gaelic
heritage.




                              CHAPTER XVI
             THE INFLUENCE OF CELTIC, ON ENGLISH LITERATURE

  Earliest contact—Loan-words—Three periods of marked literary
      influence—Layamon’s “Brut”—A fascinating study for critics—The
      development of the Arthurian Romance—Sir Thomas Malory—Question as
      to origin of rhyme—A Celtic claim—Elements in Scottish poetry—in
      English literature—Gray’s “Bard”—Macpherson’s “Ossian”—Influence
      on Wordsworth and his contemporaries—Moore’s “Irish Melodies”—Sir
      Walter Scott—Tennyson—Interesting comparison—Arnold, Shairp,
      Blackie—Novelists after Scott—Living writers.


Anglo-Saxon or Old English came into contact with Celtic from the year
449 onwards. By the end of that century the latter had the beginnings of
a literature, the former had not. Cædmon’s poem dates from nearly 200
years later.

English literature could not, therefore, have been influenced by Celtic
for centuries after the first Saxon invasion, as it had not then come
into existence. But the English language was so influenced. From the
earliest contact it doubtless bore traces of the Celtic in the form of
loan-words.

Yet, strange to say, very few such native vernacular words passed over
into Old English till the Norman invasion. The reason may have been, as
suggested by Sweet, that the Britons were themselves to a large extent
Romanised, especially those of the cities, who were for the most part
descendants of Roman soldiers.

After the Conquest many more Celtic words found their way into English
through the Norman-French, and, as might be expected, it is very
difficult to discriminate between the contributions of the earlier and
the later period. Names of persons and places, on the other hand, are
easily distinguished, because they were generally taken over without
change.

Not till the fateful Forty-five had finally broken down the ancient
barriers of racial seclusion was there any further great accession of
this Celtic element. But owing to the interest awakened then in the
Highlands, the freer intercourse established with England and the
Lowlands of Scotland, and especially through the writings of historians
and travellers, and of great authors like James Macpherson and Sir
Walter Scott, a number of new words passed from this time direct from
the Highland Gaelic as well as from the Irish into the English language.
From the former came the well-known clan, claymore, ghillie, plaid,
pibroch, sporran, slogan, whisky, reel; and from the latter, brogue,
kern, Tory, shamrock, shillelagh, usquebaugh, bother, and a few others.
Words had been dribbling from the Welsh also, as we might expect, from
time to time.

The influence on the literature began later, but it has been very marked
and continuous down to the present day. Three periods stand out as
particularly potent. The first begins from the end of the twelfth
century and extends to the Reformation. The second, taking its impetus
from the Forty-five and the Ossianic revival, carries us forward to the
time of Tennyson. And the third, coeval with the modern Celtic
renaissance, reaches from Tennyson to the present time.

Though the different branches of the Celtic people had been producing a
literature from the sixth century, that literature does not seem to have
affected English authorship, until in the Middle Ages it created the
captivating Arthurian romances. Then, like the other Continental
literatures, the English for the first time fell under the sway of the
Celtic imagination.

The earliest great poem written in the English language after the Norman
Conquest owes its inspiration and theme entirely to that source. In the
opening passage the author introduces himself thus: “There was a priest
in the land, whose name was Layamon; he was son of Lovenath; may the
Lord be gracious unto him! He dwelt at Ernley at a noble church on
Severn’s bank, good it seemed to him, near Radstone, where he read
books. It came in mind to him and in his chiefest thought that he would
of England tell the noble deeds, what the men were named, and whence
they came, who first had English land.”

This Layamon, travelling widely over the land in search of information,
found three valuable books on which he based his tale—an English
translation of Bede, a Latin book made by St. Albin and the fair Austin,
and the French one by Wace.

His own poem he called the “Brut,” after the fabulous Brutus, the
great-grandson of Aeneas, who, according to Welsh writers, became the
ancestor of the Kings of Briton. It deals chiefly with the materials of
Wace, but it gives the story of Uther Pendragon and his famous son
Arthur in much fuller detail. For example, while Wace’s “Brut” contains
15,300 lines, Layamon’s has 32,250, more than double, and the
composition is characterised by a somewhat rude attempt at alliteration
and rhyme.

There are two MSS. still extant of this interesting work, both of them
in the British Museum. The oldest is held to have been written not later
than 1205, and the language is so purely English, notwithstanding its
source, that less than fifty words of French origin have been found in
it by Sir Frederick Madden, who in 1847 first edited these texts.

Almost a hundred years pass after Layamon wrote before another English
book of the kind appears. And this time it is the rhyming chronicle of
Robert of Gloucester, who goes over some of the ground of Geoffrey of
Monmouth, and brings the history down to 1272.

A fascinating study for critics is the wonderful way in which the
Arthurian romance seems to have developed from a small beginning. This
gradual evolution can in the main be traced.

So far as our modern knowledge goes, the Arthur of real life was a
Cornish chief with a following in Wales, who met Cedric of Wessex in the
stricken field, but who himself at length fell fighting the Picts, most
probably in our own native Scotland. Gildas chronicles a great victory
won over the Saxons, but omits to record who was the victorious chief.
It is Nennius who first mentions Arthur by name, in the ninth century.
His story is vastly amplified by Geoffrey of Monmouth, who wrote about
1154, and by the time it comes from the pen of Robert Wace, some ten
years later, there is the splendid addition of the Round Table. Layamon
is able to go into details, not hitherto mentioned, of the construction
of this famous Board, which obviated quarrels over uppermost seats,
since no one could have precedence owing to its shape. Up to this point
the legend bore no Christian character. It is saturated with the magic,
and slaughter, and revenge of the old Pagan North, rich in stories of
giants, dwarfs, serpents, and heathen enchantments, far enough removed
from the spirit of medieval Christianity. But by the beginning of the
thirteenth century it suddenly underwent a great development, and new
incidents were added with which the earlier writers could not have been
acquainted.

Thomas Arnold thinks that this transformation is due to the genius of
Walter Map (_circa_ 1210), who introduced the religious element with the
view of converting the Arthurian legends, and employing them in the
service of Christianity.

From this time we have in French the Story of the Holy Grail, the
History of Merlin, Sir Launcelot of the Lake, the Quest of the Holy
Grail, and the Death of Arthur. The first two have been attributed to
Robert Borron, the latter three to Walter Map himself. But the whole
subject appears to be wrapped in singular obscurity, and offers a field
for considerable divergence of opinion. The latest dissertation on the
question is that by Jessie L. Weston in her recent publications. (Nutt:
London, 1901.) After the above, five more stories followed, such as
Tristram and the history of King Pellinore by other writers. These later
series of romances seem to have caught on better in France than in
England. For only a few metrical compositions of this class are found in
English MSS. prior to the days of Sir Thomas Malory, and these in
documents of the fifteenth century. One alliterative tale, indeed, that
of _Sir Gawayne and the Green Knight_, first printed by Sir F. Madden in
1839, and re-edited by Dr. Morris, is held by the latter to have been
written about 1320. Sir Gawayne was Arthur’s nephew, and figures in the
early stories as one of the purest models of knighthood, though very
differently represented by the author of Tristram and subsequent
writers, including even Malory, who drew from French sources. About the
middle of the fifteenth century Henry Lonelich translated into English
verse the prose narrative of the sacred Grail, and possibly this may
have led Malory, the author of the more famous _Morte d’Arthur_, to
produce, as he did about the year 1470, the remainder of the romances
connected with the Holy Grail in English prose. It was one of the
earliest books printed by William Caxton (1485), and certainly one of
the finest examples of the prose of the pre-Elizabethan period.

Sir Thomas Malory compiled it out of the French versions of “Merlin,”
“Launcelot,” “Tristram,” the “Queste du Saint Graal,” and the “Mort
Artur.” His own postscript at the end of the book fitly describes its
scope in very quaint terms. It runs as follows:—

  Heere is the end of the whole booke of King Arthur and of his noble
  Knights of the round table, that when they were whole together there
  was ever an hundred and fortie. Also heere is the end of the death of
  King Arthur. I pray you all, gentlemen and gentlewomen, that read this
  book of King Arthur and his Knights from the beginning to the ending,
  pray for me while I am alive, that God send mee good deliverance.

  And when I am dead, I pray you all pray for my soule. For this booke
  was finished the ninth yeare of the raigne of King Edward the Fourth,
  by Sir Thomas Maleor, Knight, as Jesu help me for his great might, as
  hee is the servant of Jesu both day and night.

  Thus endeth this noble and joyous booke entitled _La Mort Darthur_,
  notwithstanding it treateth of the birth, life, and acts of the said
  King Arthur and of his noble Knights of the round table, and their
  mervailous enquests and adventures, the achieving of the holy
  sancgreall, and in the end the dolorous death and departing out of
  this world of them all.

As literature, this work of Malory is very interesting, and has been
frequently edited within the last hundred years.

Beyond the powerful influences exerted by the Celtic romances, there
falls to be noticed another way in which the Gaelic genius is believed
to have affected and even moulded English poetry in the later Middle
Ages. It is well known that down to Chaucer’s time English poetry was
characterised chiefly by alliteration. Scarcely any authors attempted
rhyme. And those, like Layamon, who tried to combine both, often seem to
achieve neither the one nor the other. They failed to produce the real
effect of metre. But after Chaucer, rhyme gradually supplanted
alliteration. And it is held by various learned authorities that this is
due to Celtic influence. The Celts first invented rhyme, they say, and
in proof of this it is shown that they used it centuries before the
English or any other western nation. “Outside of Wales and Ireland,”
says Dr. Hyde, “there probably exists no example in a European
vernacular language of rhymed poetry older than the ninth century.”

And Matthew Arnold, in a footnote to his _Study of Celtic Literature_,
asserts that “rhyme,—the most striking characteristic of our modern
poetry as distinguished from that of the ancients, and a main source, to
our poetry, of its magic and charm, of what we call its _romantic
element_,—rhyme itself, all the weight of evidence tends to show, comes
into our poetry from the Celts.” And in this opinion these litterateurs
are supported by the earlier testimony of great philologists like Zeuss
and Count Nigra.

From the time of John Barbour, too, it is recognised that the bards of
Scotland who wrote English poetry have been influenced in various ways
not peculiar to their own contemporaries in England, by their connection
with and descent from the Celt. Stopford Brooke mentions three elements
of Scottish poetry that he regards as distinctly Celtic contributions.
These are, first, the love of wild nature for its own sake—the
passionate, close, and poetical observation and description of natural
scenery, which is not found in the poetry of England till near the end
of the eighteenth century; second, the love of colour so characteristic
of Gaelic and Cymric authorship; and, third, the wittier, more
rollicking humour, which contrasts with the Teutonic humour, which has
its root in sadness. The humour of Dunbar is thus as widely different
from that of Chaucer as the humour of Burns is from that of Cowper, or
of a modern Irishman is from that of a modern Englishman.

But if there is really humour in the ancient Celtic literature it is
entirely unconscious. Many passages tickle our risible faculties now,
and we smile as we read some of the narratives, such as the fight
between Queen Meve’s bull and his opponent in the old saga, but this is
because of the very wealth of the Gaelic imagination and the mendacity
of its exaggerations. It is questionable if the original Gael, the slave
of such a powerful fancy, saw anything in his own extravagant
descriptions to laugh at. More likely he perpetrated these fictions
quite as unconsciously as his Irish descendant of to-day perpetrates his
bulls.

All the same it is quite conceivable that from this early tendency to be
carried off the ground by flights of fancy, the Scottish sense of
humour, conspicuous in the poets from pre-Reformation times, may have
developed.

That Celtic literature revelled from a remote antiquity in nature and
love of colour is very manifest from the earliest Gaelic, Welsh, and
Breton tales. Take, for instance, the following description of Olwen
from the Welsh:—

  The maiden was clothed in a robe of flame-coloured silk, and about her
  neck was a collar of ruddy gold, on which were precious emeralds and
  rubies. More yellow was her head than the flower of the broom, and her
  skin was whiter than the foam of the wave, and fairer were her hands
  and her fingers than the blossoms of the wood anemone amidst the spray
  of the meadow fountain. The eye of the trained hawk, the glance of the
  three-mewed falcon, was not brighter than hers. Her bosom was more
  snowy than the breast of the white swan, her cheek was redder than the
  reddest roses. Whoso beheld her was filled with her love. Four white
  trefoils sprang up wherever she trod.

The old sagas and romances are full of this sort of vision. It was
impossible that such Celtic compositions could exist without imparting
some of their charm, their brilliant colouring, their observation, and
delight in nature and the unknown, to English literature. Naturally,
Scottish poetry first felt this influence. But the wonder is that
English literature as a whole was so late in being permeated therewith.
When it did enter, it effected a mighty change both in the style and
subject matter.

Beyond rhyme, love of nature, love of colour, and a certain type of
humour, which we have just glanced at, Matthew Arnold recognised three
elements which are in a manner distinct from these. “If I were asked,”
he says, “where English poetry got these three things—its turn for
style, its turn for melancholy, and its turn for natural magic, for
catching and rendering the charm of nature in a wonderfully near and
vivid way—I should answer, with some doubt, that it got much of its turn
for style from a Celtic source; with less doubt, that it got much of its
melancholy from a Celtic source; with no doubt at all, that from a
Celtic source it got nearly all its natural magic.”...

“The Celt’s quick feeling for what is noble and distinguished gave his
poetry style; his indomitable personality gave it pride and passion; his
sensibility and nervous exaltation gave it a better gift still, the gift
of rendering with wonderful felicity the magical charm of nature. The
forest solitude, the bubbling spring, the wildflowers are everywhere in
romance. They have a mysterious life and grace there; they are nature’s
own children, and utter her secret in a way which makes them something
quite different from the woods, waters, and plants of Greek and Latin
poetry. Now, of this delicate magic Celtic romance is so pre-eminent a
mistress, that it seems impossible to believe the power did not come
into romance from the Celts. Magic is just the word for it—the magic of
nature; not merely the beauty of nature,—_that_ the Greeks and Latins
had; not merely an honest smack of the soil, a faithful realism,—_that_
the Germans had; but the intimate life of nature—her weird power and her
fairy charm.” What better example of this distinction between the magic
and beauty of nature might be wished for than the following beautiful
conception? “Well,” says Math to Gwydion, “we will seek, I and thou, to
form a wife for him out of flowers. So they took the blossoms of the
oak, and the blossoms of the broom, and the blossoms of the
meadow-sweet, and produced from them a maiden, the fairest and most
graceful that man ever saw. And they baptized her, and gave her the name
of Flower-Aspect.”

Shakespeare, in handling nature, while he had the Greek touch, is also
credited with sometimes striking the more exquisite and inimitable
Celtic note. Thus:—

            The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,
            When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
            And they did make no noise, in such a night
            Troilus, methinks, mounted the Trojan walls—
                             ... In such a night
            Did Thisbe fearfully o’er-trip the dew—
                             ... In such a night
            Stood Dido with a willow in her hand,
            Upon the wild seabanks, and waved her love
            To come again to Carthage.

But we must pass on to the second period, the period after the
Forty-five, to see a more abundant entrance of the Celtic elements into
English literature as a whole. It might be detected in isolated
instances, but during the latter half of the eighteenth century both
prose and poetry were influenced by Celtic in a very marked degree.

Collin’s ode on the “Popular Superstitions of the Highlands” was perhaps
the first contribution after the memorable Rising to herald the new
time. If we except Shakespeare’s “Macbeth,” it is almost the earliest
inroad by an English poet into the wild and romantic regions beyond the
Grampians.

After him came Gray, with a similar interest in Celtic lore. His
well-known poem “The Bard” appeared in 1755. This ode is founded on a
tradition current in Wales that Edward I., when he completed the
conquest of that country, decreed the death of all the bards who should
fall into his power. The original argument of this fine production is
set down in the author’s commonplace book as follows:—

  The army of Edward I., as they march through a deep valley, are
  suddenly stopped by the appearance of a venerable figure seated on the
  summit of an inaccessible rock, who, with a voice more than human,
  reproaches the king with all the misery and desolation which he had
  brought on his country; foretells the misfortunes of the Norman race,
  and, with prophetic spirit, declares that all his cruelty shall never
  extinguish the noble ardour of poetic genius in this island; and that
  men shall never be wanting to celebrate true virtue and valour in
  immortal strains, to expose vice and infamous pleasure, and boldly
  censure tyranny and oppression. His song ended, he precipitates
  himself from the mountain, and is swallowed up by the river that rolls
  at its foot.

Gray deviated a little from this original sketch, but the above is, in
the main, the gist of the poem.

      “Ruin seize thee, ruthless King!
      Confusion on thy banners wait!
      Though fanned by conquest’s crimson wing,
      They mock the air with idle state.
      Helm nor hauberk’s twisted mail,
      Nor e’en thy virtues, Tyrant, shall avail
      To save thy secret soul from nightly fears,
      From Cambria’s curse, from Cambria’s tears!”
      Such were the sounds that o’er the crested pride
      Of the first Edward scatter’d wild dismay,
      As down the steep of Snowdon’s shaggy side
      He wound with toilsome march his long array.
      Stout Glo’ster stood aghast in speechless trance:
      “To arms!” cried Mortimer, and couched his quivering lance.

      On a rock, whose haughty brow
      Frowns o’er old Conway’s foaming flood,
      Robed in the sable garb of woe,
      With haggard eyes the poet stood;
      (Loose his beard, and hoary hair
      Stream’d like a meteor, to the troubled air;)
      And, with a master’s hand and prophet’s fire,
      Struck the deep sorrows of his lyre.
      “Hark! how each giant oak, and desert cave,
      Sighs to the torrent’s awful voice beneath:
      O’er thee, oh King! their hundred arms they wave,
      Revenge on thee in hoarser murmurs breathe;
      Vocal no more, since Cambria’s fatal day,
      To high-born Hoël’s harp, or soft Llewellyn’s lay,” etc.

In addition to “The Bard,” Gray translated into English verse fragments
of the “Gododin” and “The Triumphs of Owen” from Mr. Evans’s _Specimens
of the Welsh Poetry_, published in London in 1764.

After Gray came the renowned Macpherson, representing the very soul of
the Celtic genius, and Europe listened surprised as it felt the thrill
of the new notes which he struck from the old instrument—the passionate,
penetrating regret, the deep melancholy, the sensitiveness to the powers
of nature. In his _Ossian_ we are made to feel “the desolation of dusky
moors, the solemn brooding of the mists on the mountains, the occasional
looking through them of sun by day, of moon and stars by night, the
gloom of dark cloudy Bens or cairns, with flashing cataracts, the ocean
with its storms.” And when the wind shrieks and the elements do
frightful battle, there is the eerie sensation of ghostly presences
hovering around the warriors on the hillside or out on the ocean.

And through all the sadness of sorrow and the clang of conflict there
break gleams of tender light and soothing reflection, as, for example:—

  Come, thou beam that art lonely, from watching in the night! The
  squally winds are around thee, from all their echoing hills. Red, over
  my hundred streams, are the light-covered paths of the dead. They
  rejoice on the eddying winds, in the season of the night. Dwells there
  no joy in song, white hand of the harps of Lutha? Awake the voice of
  the string; roll my soul to me. It is a stream that has failed.
  Malvina, pour the song.

  I hear thee from thy darkness in Selma, thou that watchest lonely by
  night! Why didst thou withhold the song from Ossian’s failing soul? As
  the falling brook to the ear of the hunter, descending from his
  storm-covered hill, in a sunbeam rolls the echoing stream, he hears
  and shakes his dewy locks: such is the voice of Lutha to the friend of
  the spirits of heroes. My swelling bosom beats high. I look back on
  the days that are past. Come, thou beam that art lonely, from watching
  in the night!

No wonder these plaintive notes struck the heart of modern times with
overpowering emotion, awakening a sympathy with the past, and opening a
new avenue of vision into the life of nature. Englishmen especially, who
had hitherto beheld the bleak mountains, the moors, and the naked rocks
with feeling almost akin to aversion, began to see a hidden beauty and
majesty in these sublime and lonely objects. And a passion for nature
gradually crept into English poetry. Thomson had made a beginning in
this direction with his _Seasons_ as early as 1726–30, but it cannot be
said that he quite struck the notes which afterwards so moved and
enchanted the readers of Macpherson, Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, and
Tennyson.

The new Ossian had a wonderful mastery of style, rhythmical flow,
pathos, and sometimes even sublimity of language, though it can scarcely
be said that he represented the realistic force and vivid exactness of
the Gaelic he sought to imitate in his English style. Of his
_Fragments_, when they appeared, the poet Gray wrote: “I was so struck,
so extasié with their infinite beauty, that I writ into Scotland to make
a thousand enquiries.” And he adds, “In short, this man is the very
demon of poetry, or he has lighted on a treasure hid for ages.”

English poets and litterateurs from this time found a new well-spring of
inspiration in the ancient Celtic fountain thus wondrously and
unexpectedly tapped. And so we find men like Pennant, Dr. Johnson,
Boswell, and numerous other interested travellers and historians, making
pilgrimages through the Highlands, with the view of observing for
themselves the old life surviving there, and of gathering up materials
for literary work. Each of the above-named, well known in the pages of
English literature, have contributed books which are now classic
authorities on the social customs and conditions of the Highlands at the
time of their visit, and thus helped to carry a stream of Celtic thought
and feeling into the prose of the period, which was afterwards more
fully developed by the great magician, Sir Walter Scott.

Meanwhile the new elements had entered into the warp and woof of English
poetry, and may be traced in all the great masters of the period—Cowper,
Burns, Wordsworth, Crabbe, Byron, and their numerous contemporaries.
Blake was so enthusiastic that he is generally regarded as an imitator
of Macpherson, and Southey, going even farther back, edited, with
introduction, in 1817, the _Morte d’Arthur_ of Sir Thomas Malory before
mentioned.

Yet more characteristically Celtic as a poet than all these, because
himself an Irishman, was Thomas Moore, author of _Lalla Rookh_, an
Indian tale; and _Irish Melodies_. It is with these latter lyrics that
we are here most concerned, because they exhibit so much the quality of
the Gaelic muse in English verse. Take, for example, the following
delightful pieces—euphonious, melancholy, and touching—so full of the
Ossianic sadness and Celtic sentiment for the past, and for the dead
heroes:—

               The harp that once through Tara’s halls
                 The soul of music shed,
               Now hangs as mute on Tara’s walls
                 As if that soul were fled.
               So sleeps the pride of former days,
                 So glory’s thrill is o’er;
               And hearts that once beat high for praise
                 Now feel that pulse no more!

               No more to chiefs and ladies bright
                 The harp of Tara swells;
               The chord alone, that breaks at night,
                 Its tale of ruin tells.
               Thus freedom now so seldom wakes,
                 The only throb she gives,
               Is when some heart indignant breaks
                 To show that still she lives.

This one, too, sounds a similar note. It is entitled “After the
Battle”:—

              Night closed around the conqueror’s way,
                And lightnings show’d the distant hill,
              Where those who lost that dreadful day
                Stood few and faint, but fearless still!
              The soldier’s hope, the patriot’s zeal,
                For ever dimm’d, for ever crost—
              Oh! who shall say what heroes feel
                When all but life and honour’s lost?

              The last sad hour of freedom’s dream
                And valour’s task mov’d slowly by,
              While mute they watch’d, till morning’s beam
                Should rise and give them light to die.
              There’s yet a world where souls are free,
                Where tyrants taint not nature’s bliss;
              If death that world’s bright opening be,
                Oh! who would live a slave in this?

From Moore it is but a step to the great master-hand of Celtic romance,
the heroic Sir Walter Scott, who has done more than any modern writer to
popularise the literature of the Gael, and to make the Gael and his
country interesting to Englishmen. With his magic power he threw a halo
over the land and the people, and made their past live again in his
enchanting pages. What a world of forgotten romance he brought to light
alike in his prose and his poetry! In the _Lady of the Lake_, _Tales of
a Grandfather_, _Waverley_, and _Rob Roy_, we have Celtic life and
tradition depicted in a way which has vastly influenced and enriched our
English literature, besides showing the gate to subsequent authors into
a field near at hand, into which English imagination, much less English
sympathy and literary art, had hardly as yet found its way. What
Wordsworth in England did for the Lake District, Scott in Scotland did
for the Highlands, fostering the love for scenery which the English
poets had already begun to awaken.

Yet, more than any of his predecessors who cultivated the poetry of
natural description, Scott carried into English literature the Celtic
imagination and sentiment, the Celtic magic and wistful veneration for
the past, which made him the wizard of modern literary romance.

The enthusiasm aroused by Macpherson, and even more by himself, had not
died down before another great period of Celtic influence arrived—the
last, and, in certain respects, the most potent and extensive of all. As
early as 1842, the _Morte d’Arthur_ and some other pieces of Tennyson
appeared, but it was in 1859, contemporary with the Celtic renaissance
at home and abroad, that he published _The Idylls of the King_. Founding
on the old Arthurian romances, as told in English by Sir Thomas Malory,
Tennyson depicts anew the more picturesque characters and incidents,
idealising them in his own inimitable poetic style. So we have, in
twelve books,—

                        The Coming of Arthur,
                        Gareth and Lynette,
                        The Marriage of Geraint,
                        Geraint and Enid,
                        Balin and Balan,
                        Merlin and Vivien,
                        Lancelot and Elaine,
                        The Holy Grail,
                        Pelleas and Ettarre,
                        The Last Tournament,
                        Guinevere, and
                        The Passing of Arthur.

The charm of these Idylls, which rank among the Poet-Laureate’s best
work, may be gathered from the opening passage, describing the coming of
Arthur:—

           Leodogran, the King of Cameliard,
           Had one fair daughter, and none other child;
           And she was fairest of all flesh on earth,
           Guinevere, and in her his one delight.

             For many a petty king ere Arthur came
           Ruled in this isle, and ever waging war
           Each upon other, wasted all the land;
           And still from time to time the heathen host
           Swarm’d overseas, and harried what was left.
           And so there grew great tracts of wilderness,
           Wherein the beast was ever more and more,
           But man was less and less, till Arthur came.
           For first Aurelius lived and fought and died,
           And after him King Uther fought and died,
           But either fail’d to make the kingdom one.
           And after these King Arthur for a space,
           And thro’ the puissance of his Table Round,
           Drew all their petty princedoms under him,
           Their King and head, and made a realm and reign’d.

             And thus the land of Cameliard was waste,
           Thick with wet woods, and many a beast therein,
           And none or few to scare or chase the beast;
           So that wild dog, and wolf and boar and bear
           Came night and day, and rooted in the fields,
           And wallow’d in the gardens of the King.
           And ever and anon the wolf would steal
           The children and devour, but now and then,
           Her own brood lost or dead, lent her fierce teat
           To human sucklings; and the children, housed
           In her foul den, there at their meat would growl,
           And mock their foster-mother on four feet,
           Till, straighten’d, they grew up to wolf-like men,
           Worse than the wolves.

This, surely, puts us back into the old days. But “Arthur heard the call
and came; and Guinevere stood by the castle walls to watch him pass.”
The Celtic ideal of woman and the Celtic pursuit of the unknown and
mysterious, and the delicacy and passion that characterise the early
romances, pervade these nineteenth century Idylls throughout.

It is interesting to compare the Passing of Arthur, for example, as
recorded by Layamon, with Tennyson’s more elaborate and developed
idealisation. According to the former, these were the words of the
king’s dying speech to Constantine:—

  I will fare to Avalun to the fairest of all maidens, to Arganté the
  Queen, an elf most fair, and she shall make my wounds all sound; make
  me all whole with healing draughts. And afterwards I will come again
  to my kingdom and dwell with the Britons with mickle joy! Even with
  the words there approached from the sea a little short boat floating
  with the waves; and two women therein wondrously formed; and they took
  Arthur anon and bare him quickly and laid him softly down, and forth
  they gan depart. Then was it accomplished that Merlin whilom said,
  that mickle care should come of Arthur’s departure. The Britons
  believe yet that he is alive, and dwelleth in Avalun with the fairest
  of all elves, and the Britons even yet expect when Arthur shall
  return.

Compare with this the appearance from the wave of Tennyson’s wondrous
barge with its fair occupants, and the famous farewell speech Arthur
made before setting out. After the well-known passage beginning, “The
old order changeth, yielding place to new,” he goes on:—

           But now farewell. I am going a long way
           With these thou seést—if indeed I go
           (For all my mind is clouded with a doubt)—
           To the island-valley of Avilion;
           Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
           Nor ever wind blows loudly; but it lies
           Deep-meadow’d, happy, fair with orchard lawns
           And bowery hollows crown’d with summer sea,
           Where I will heal me of my grievous wound.

             So said he, and the barge with oar and sail
           Moved from the brink, like some full-breasted swan
           That, fluting a wild carol ere her death,
           Ruffles her pure cold plume, and takes the flood
           With swarthy webs. Long stood Sir Bedivere
           Revolving many memories, till the hull
           Look’d one black dot against the verge of dawn,
           And on the mere the wailing died away.

             But when that moan had past for evermore,
           The stillness of the dead world’s winter dawn
           Amazed him, and he groan’d, “The King is gone.”
           And therewithal came on him the weird rhyme,
           “From the great deep to the great deep he goes.”

Sir Bedivere was thus the sole survivor of the Knights of the Round
Table. In the final battle all that remained of them perished except the
king himself and two knights, who escaped wounded. But first one and
then the other passed, dying from his hurt. With what a halo of colour
and real Celtic enchantment poets and romancers have covered up the last
grim tragedy of the wounded knight watching his master, the royal Arthur
die, after all the rest were fallen and gone, and the Round Table was
from henceforth to be but a memory.

Macaulay must have inherited the Celtic power of pictorial detail and
vivid colouring, though he might not willingly acknowledge it. Where did
he get that brilliant turn for style and those suggestive tricks of
lively fancy if not from his Celtic ancestry?

After him came three Celtic enthusiasts of great literary standing, who
put Macaulay’s apathy towards the Gaelic and Cymric tradition to the
blush. These were Matthew Arnold; John Campbell Shairp, Professor of
Poetry at Oxford, and Principal of the United College, St. Andrews; and
Professor Blackie of Edinburgh.

Over the first, the apostle of culture, and otherwise dispassionate
critic, the Celtic past undoubtedly cast a spell. The finding of its
literature seemed to have influenced him in a similar manner as the
hoving of a new planet into his ken thrills the eager astronomer. And we
have his personal contribution in his well-known _Study of Celtic
Literature_ (1867), a book which, like Renan’s French essay, has done
much to enhance the reputation and influence of our ancient heritage in
modern times. It was through his strenuous advocacy that the Celtic
chair which Professor Rhys now occupies in Oxford was established.

Principal Shairp published _Kilmahoe: a Highland Pastoral, with other
Poems_, in 1864; his _Poetic Interpretation of Nature_ in 1877; and
_Aspects of Poetry_ in 1881. These books revel in the Celtic sentiment,
its melancholy, and love of nature. Their author exhibited the same
spirit of admiration for the Gaelic muse that Matthew Arnold did for the
Cymric.

In one of his Highland lyrics, entitled, “A Dream of Glen Sallach,”
Shairp showed that he could be overpowered by the gloom pervading the
land of the heather as much as any Gael:—

              In deep of noon, mysterious dread
              Fell on me in that glimmering glen,
              Till as from haunted ground I fled
              Back to the kindly homes of men.

              Thanks to that glen! its scenery blends
              With childhood’s most ideal hour,
              When Highland hills I made my friends,
              First owned their beauty, felt their power.

And in “The Forest of Sli’-Gaoil” he muses thus of other days:—

              And doth not this bleak forest ground
              Live in old epic song renowned?
              Of him the chief who came of yore
              To hunting of the mighty boar,
              And left the deed, to float along
              The dateless stream of Highland song,
              A maid’s lorn love, a chief’s death toil.
              Still speaking in thy name Sli’-Gaoil!
              Well now may harp of Ossian moan
              Through long bent grass and worn grey stone:
              But how could song so long ago,
              Come loaded with some elder wo?
              Were then, as now, these hills o’er-cast
              With shadows of some long-gone past!
              Did winds, that wandered o’er them, chime
              Melodies of a lorn foretime?
              As now, the very mountain burns
              For something sigh that not returns!

Professor Blackie in later life had a similar passionate regard for
Celtic literature, and not only did much by poetic renderings into
English from the Gaelic, and in other ways, to introduce English readers
to the best treasures of the Gaelic past, but also, like Matthew Arnold,
was instrumental in founding a Celtic chair, namely, that in Edinburgh
University.

Of novelists who, like Sir Walter Scott, have drawn their themes and
inspiration from Celtic sources, there has been a splendid succession
from the days of Tennyson till now. Among others, besides the veteran
Dr. George Macdonald, we may mention William Black, Robert Buchanan, and
Robert Louis Stevenson, all three now dead, but recognised in their time
as men of considerable literary genius. Black’s descriptions, his scenes
and incidents and characters in those graphic stories laid in the West
Highlands, are well known, and are as full of nature as Stevenson’s
thrilling tales of _Kidnapped_ and _Catriona_ are of Celtic passion and
adventure. Buchanan’s _Child of Nature_ is now perhaps not so well known
as these others, but the plot is laid in the extreme north-west corner
of Sutherlandshire, and interprets Gaelic life and character with
wonderful verve and insight. All the three writers seem to have caught
the magic glamour of the North, and to have been influenced in their
style by the Celtic elements.

Of living novelists to carry on the succession we have still a
distinguished contingent. Besides names, less familiar, the following
have achieved a wide reputation, namely, Dr. John Watson (Ian Maclaren),
Neil Munro, Fiona Macleod, Katherine Tynan, and W. B. Yeats. These
writers are distinctly Celtic in style, idiom, and sentiment. They have
all the passion, yearning, imagination, and emotion of the Gael,
combined with his wonderful gift of story-telling and of local colour.

There are other writers of distinction, such as Andrew Lang, Dr. Douglas
Hyde, Sir Charles Gavan Duffy, Dr. Sigerson, Dr. Todhunter, Stopford A.
Brooke, Edmund Jones, T. W. Rolleston, Miss Eleanor Hull, Miss Jessie L.
Weston, Miss Goodrich Frere, and Miss Emily Lawless, who have done much
of later years to popularise the Celtic lore and literature, and to
extend its sway over English letters.

Through books of history and philology which have been issuing from the
press in a steady flow for decades past, the tide of Celtic influence
still continues to rise and permeate every department of English
literature. So that from that little spring we saw welling up in the
fifth century, and which at first yielded but a few words of Celtic
import to incipient English, we have been able to trace a continuous
stream, gaining in volume and momentum through the centuries, until now
it is like a mighty Missouri which mingles its waters with the broader
and more potent Mississippi, to be carried to the great ocean of human
intercourse, and lose itself in the common good.




                              CHAPTER XVII
              THE PRINTED LITERATURE OF THE SCOTTISH GAEL

  Two interesting bibliographies—Surprising revelations—First Gaelic
      printed book—Meagre output prior to the Forty-five—Earliest
      original works issued—No complete Bible in type before
      1801—Nineteenth century activity—The Highlander’s favourite
      books—A revelation of character—His printed literature mainly
      religious—Translations—The two books in greatest demand—Dearth
      of the masterpieces of other languages—The most popular of
      English religious writers—of native bards—Gaelic poetry—The
      printed succession—Notable books—Account of the Gaelic
      grammars—Dictionaries—Periodicals—Value of the literature.


A close study of the printed literature of the Scottish Gael leads to
some surprising and even wholly unexpected revelations. Happily, we have
the materials for such a scrutiny within moderate compass, a fact which
cannot be predicated of the more comprehensive and ubiquitous English.

It is an amazing circumstance—indeed the _Spectator_, some seventy years
ago, dubbed it “a piece of Highland dilettanteism”—that one should be
found enthusiastic enough to attempt to make an exhaustive bibliography
of the printed Gaelic output of Scotland. Yet such a devotee has emerged
not once, but twice within the last century.

First, in the person of John Reid, a Glasgow bookseller of Lowland
birth, who published in 1832 his _Bibliotheca Scoto-Celtica_, or “an
account of all the books which have been printed in the Gaelic
language,” down to that date.

Second, in the person of the Rev. Donald Maclean, minister of Duirinish,
Skye, who brought the catalogue forward to 1900, arranging the authors’
names alphabetically, and giving the various editions, with their dates
and places of publication. This MS., which has not yet been printed,
contains in addition a complete transcript of the title of each work, an
account of the author or translator so far as known, the number of
copies printed, size of paper, and published price, and in the case of
the very rare books, an account of the copies known to exist, and the
price they fetched on transfer.

Had it not been for the earlier researches of Reid, it is not likely so
elaborate an effort would have ever been attempted. Even Reid seems to
have been lured on gradually, all unconscious at first of the magnitude
of the task, for he says that his book was not written with the view of
being published. On the contrary, its _raison d’être_ is thus explained
by him in the preface:—

  While studying the Gaelic language in 1825 a friend wished me to make
  up a catalogue of his Gaelic books. It appeared, after the list was
  made up, scarcely probable that many more should exist, and under the
  idea of having almost already completed the list, the present work was
  undertaken. All the Gaelic books in the neighbourhood were examined,
  but I found the work increase so rapidly on my hands that it became
  necessary to class them and re-write the whole; and the longer I
  searched the more I was convinced that the literature of the Gael was
  richer than even its friends imagined. The number of translations,
  song-books, etc., which I now met with, many of them works which I had
  never previously heard of, obliged me four times to extend the plan
  originally adopted, and to re-write the MS.

Reid ransacked the principal libraries in this country and on the
Continent in search of Gaelic books, yet he admits the list must
necessarily be imperfect. When finished, the work was awarded a premium
by the Highland Society of London in 1831, and printed the following
year. It has been the aim of his bibliographic successor to supplement
and complete the list by a new classification up to date.

Both men deserve credit for having patiently and persistently pursued
what was undoubtedly an interesting but eminently thankless task, so far
at least as financial remuneration was concerned.

When we hark back to the period when MS. writing first began to pass
into modern type, we discover that no book of any kind was printed in
this country before 1477. In that year Caxton issued in London the
earliest publication from an English printing press. Other books quickly
followed, but nearly a century elapsed before any Gaelic writing passed
through the inky mill.

The first printed work in that language is the translation of John
Knox’s _Liturgy_ by Bishop Carsewell, published in Edinburgh in 1567.
Carsewell, or Carsuel, as the name is sometimes spelt, a native of
Kilmartin, was superintendent of the diocese of Argyll, and well versed
in the Highland vernacular. It was he who, in the preface to his work,
denounced the ancient _ursgeuls_ or Gaelic prose tales as lying fables,
and inaugurated a clerical campaign against the popular ballads. Yet he
merits our approbation for getting into print so early a book which
modern philologists regard as uncommonly valuable.

Only three copies exist of the original issue,—one, complete, in the
possession of the Duke of Argyll, and two others imperfect. Of the
twain, one is now in Edinburgh University Library, the other in the
British Museum.

The Duke’s was lost for a time, but recovered in 1842, and doubtless
restored to its ancient place in Inverary Castle.

This rare book is five inches long and three and a half broad,
containing 247 pages, on the 246th of which occurs the couplet:—

                       Gras Dé is na thós atáimid
                       Ni ránuic sé fós finid.

And on the last page the following:—

                               DO BVAILE

                             adh so agclo an
                           Dvn Edin Le Ro
                           ibeart Lekprevik
                           24 Aprilis 1567.

In 1872 the Rev. Dr. Maclauchlan transcribed it entire for a new edition
which was published the following year, 1873.

Nearly another century glides slowly by after the printing press
disgorged Carsewell’s translation before any further Gaelic
printing—that we know of—took place, if we except the translation of
Calvin’s Catechism issued at Edinburgh in 1631. In fact, three
psalm-books complete the list for the whole of that seventeenth century,
namely, the first fifty Psalms of David with the Shorter Catechism,
published by the Synod of Argyll in 1659, exactly ninety-two years after
the Liturgy; another Psalter by John Kirke in 1684, and the Synod of
Argyll’s finished in 1694. Thus in the sixteenth century we have just
one Gaelic printed book; in the seventeenth, three and a catechism; and
all these merely translations from other languages.

Not till 1741 do we encounter any original work, and even then it is
simply a Gaelic Vocabulary by Alexander Macdonald, the gifted bard of
Ardnamurchan. So that till after the Forty-five, Gaelic Scotland had no
printed literature of its own—neither poetry nor prose of any kind.

Indeed, with the exception of a few reprints between 1702 and 1725 of
the Synod of Argyll’s Psalter and Catechism, and Kirke’s Irish version
of the Bible and Vocabulary in 1690, Lhuyd’s Vocabulary in Nicholson’s
_Historical Library_, 1702, and Macdonald’s, 1741, there were no
additions to the printed list of the Highlands till Baxter’s _Call to
the Unconverted_ was issued in Gaelic in 1750, Macdonald’s _Songs_ in
1751, and David Mackellar’s _Hymns_ in 1752. These two latter volumes
were the early precursors in type of that considerable output of song
and hymn and story with which we have been familiar in later years.

After them came, in 1752, a small book entitled _Hymn of Praise_
(English and Gaelic), Willison’s _Mother’s Catechism_, and next year
Macfarlane’s _Translation of the Psalms, with forty-five of the
Paraphrases_.

Between 1753 and 1767, Reid could not find that any Gaelic work was
printed, with the exception of reprints of the Mother’s and Shorter
Catechisms and Macdonald’s songs.

Like some slow-moving stream, the output was at first very feeble and
irregular, and drawn for the most part from imported sources.

In 1767, however, an event occurred in the Gaelic printing world worthy
of special notice. This was the issue of the New Testament for the first
time in the language of the Highland people. It was translated by
Stewart of Killin, with the assistance of Dugald Buchanan and other
eminent Gaelic scholars, and was published by the Society for
Propagating Christian Knowledge. Strange to say, the language of this
translation was looked upon at that period as perfectly free from Irish
idiom, and yet in Reid’s day, half a century later, it was regarded as
savouring more of Irish than of Gaelic.

The same year in which the New Testament saw the light in the ancient
dialect there appeared also the celebrated hymns of Dugald Buchanan, and
the year after the no less famous songs of Duncan Ban Macintyre.

As yet no Bible existed in the language of the Highlands, and attention
having been drawn to this fact, the Society for Propagating Christian
Knowledge set themselves to supply the defect. It was arranged to have
the Old Testament translated and issued in four parts, which were
ultimately published in Edinburgh as follows:—

                           Part I. in 1783.
                           Part IV. in 1786.
                           Part II. in 1787.
                           Part III. in 1801.

The first part contained the Pentateuch, to which was prefixed a
vocabulary of five pages and general rules for reading the Gaelic
language. The second comprised from Joshua to the end of 1 Chronicles.
The third, published last, contained 2 Chronicles and on to the end of
the Song of Solomon. The fourth was made up of the Prophets, and to it
was prefixed an advertisement, stating the use that had been made of
various English translations.

The Rev. Dr. John Stuart of Luss was responsible for the rendering from
Hebrew into Gaelic of the first three parts, and the Rev. Dr. John Smith
of Campbeltown for the fourth, which appeared second in point of
publication.

Their MS. translations were, before being sent to press, submitted for
revision to a Committee of Highland clergymen specially selected; and by
order of the General Assembly of 1782 a collection was made in all the
parishes to defray the expense. This appointment was renewed in 1783 and
1784, as the funds of the S.P.C.K. were reduced, and the outlay on
publication amounted to £2300 for some 5000 copies, with an additional
number of Part I. containing the Pentateuch. The whole work was printed
on fine and common paper; and until the early decades of last century
was looked upon as the standard of Gaelic orthography.

Considering that the Bible has since come to be regarded as a kind of
fetich in the Highlands, it is somewhat surprising to learn that there
was no complete rendering of it in the language earlier than 1801, just
a century ago. And apparently not till 1807 were the Gaelic Old and New
Testaments finally printed together in one volume. In that year they
were thus issued in England for the first time on behalf of the British
and Foreign Bible Society, who chose two different colours of paper for
the purpose—the one blue for the Old Testament, and the other yellow for
the New, which gave the book rather a polychrome appearance. The
impression amounted to 20,000 copies, each of which cost the Society 6s.
6d., though they issued them to subscribers at half that price.

Of the Gaelic Scriptures there have been fourteen different recensions.

From the time of the publication of Dugald Buchanan’s and Duncan Ban
Macintyre’s compositions in 1767–68, may be reckoned the real beginning
of the new era of printing, so far as the production of original Gaelic
literature was concerned, and that mainly poetry, for of prose the land
was singularly barren, except in translations. And it will hardly be
credited that from the introduction of printing down to the end of the
eighteenth century, just about a hundred years ago, if we exclude the
translations from other languages, and extra editions of books already
published, there were not in all three dozen printed original
Scottish-Gaelic works to be found. The day of copious issue had not yet
arrived for the sweet and tuneful Gaelic.

Even the collected MSS. of Macpherson did not appear in type till 1807,
almost half a century after his so-called translations electrified the
literary world.

Thus it will be seen that the nineteenth century was really the golden
age of Gaelic printing, for, with the exception of the straggling
volumes indicated above, the literature we now have passed into printed
book form within the last hundred years. From the beginning of the
century there was a marked increase in the rate of publication—an
activity which has been growing in volume and momentum to the present
day.

And now it will be found highly informing and even entertaining to
review the printed literature of the Gael, to consider its character,
its general features, and specially to note what the Highlander deemed
worthy of putting into type—his favourite books. Such a survey, in fact,
amounts to a revelation of character, and throws a wonderful light on
his recent past, his outlook on life, and peculiar habits of thought.
Indeed, the glimpse we get here of the mental composition and literary
limitations of the purely Gaelic-speaking or Gaelic-reading section of
our countrymen is really amazing, and if we did not know that they now
rely so much for their knowledge and information on the English
language, would simply be incredible.

It surprised Reid beyond measure that there were so many Gaelic printed
books to catalogue seventy years ago, and probably he thought the work
was well-nigh complete for all time, but had he lived to-day to scan the
amended and supplemented list, it would almost take his breath away, for
he expected the Gaelic long before now to be as extinct as the
Waldensian or the Cornish. He just gave it fifty years in which to “die
down and drone and cease.” People in general, even Highlanders, are
scarcely aware of the very considerable number of printed books that
exist in the native tongue.

But a cursory glance at the catalogue shows the derived nature of the
material. A large proportion of the volumes consists of translations,
and these translations, if we except the Scriptures, are almost, if not
entirely from the English. And here we are face to face with a most
striking fact. The literature represented, both in the original and in
translations, is mainly religious.

You will search in vain for the masterpieces of other languages and
other nations. The Hebrew Bible and Greek New Testament, _The Arabian
Nights’ Entertainments_, parts of Homer’s _Iliad_, and Thomas à Kempis’
_Imitatio Christi_, are perhaps the solitary exceptions. All the best
literature of the world has been given a silent go-by.

And this is true even of the greatest English and Scottish works of
genius. You will not find Chaucer, or Shakespeare, or Bacon, or Gibbon,
Scott or Dickens, Thackeray, Carlyle, or Tennyson here. Two poems alone
of Burns are translated, “Tam o’ Shanter” and “Auld Langsyne,” but the
great masters are to Gaelic print as if they had never existed. Science
is unknown, and art and philosophy; history, too, we may say, and the
drama. Whole departments of human thought remain practically
unrepresented, as if they were alien to the Gaelic mind.

On the other hand, works of religion, pious devotion, theology, and
ecclesiastical polemics abound, showing the peculiar cast of the modern
Celtic temperament.

And of all the books, that which has been most in demand, if we may
judge by the extraordinary frequency with which it has been printed, has
been the Shorter Catechism. We are confronted with the curious fact that
between the year 1651 and the Disruption in 1843 no less than seventy
editions or reprints of this document were issued, and this
notwithstanding the circumstance that it was also usually published with
the oft-printed Psalter. The version far and away the most in evidence
seems to have been the Synod of Argyll’s, though other versions, such as
Dr. Ross’s, Dr. Macdonald’s, Dr. Smith’s, and Morrison’s were in
circulation, besides various other Catechisms, of which Willison’s and
Watt’s were prominent examples. The Gael seems to have had a perfect
mania for Catechisms. And next to these in his estimation comes the
Psalter, with nearly eighty editions or reprints between the year 1659
and the Disruption.

These editions represent six important versions, without taking into
account other four unauthorised ones. The select six may be given in
chronological order, as follows:—

   1. The Synod of Argyll’s translation of the first fifty Psalms,
        entitled, “An Ceud Chaogad do Shalmaibh,” 1659; and the whole,
        1694.

   2. Kirke’s Psalter—a translation by the Rev. Robert Kirke,
        Balquidder, 1684. This was the first complete version issued,
        ante-dating the former when finished by ten years.

   3. Macfarlane’s translation, which is just the Synod of Argyll’s
        amended and altered by the Rev. Alex. Macfarlane, M.A., of
        Kilninver and Kilmelford, who excluded many of the Irishisms and
        added forty-five of the paraphrases, 1753.

   4. Smith’s revised version, including all the Paraphrases, by the
        Rev. Dr. Smith, Campbeltown, 1787.

   5. Ross’s Psalter, also an amendment, by the Rev. Thomas Ross, LL.D.,
        Lochbroom, 1807.

   6. The General Assembly’s authorised translation, 1826.

Of these the most extensively used seems to have been Dr. Smith’s, which
ran through no less than thirty or thirty-five editions in half a
century. Next to his, in popular esteem, came Macfarlane’s, represented
by twenty. Ross’s and the General Assembly’s have also had a wide vogue,
especially in more recent times.

Besides the Shorter Catechism and Psalter, the _Confession of Faith_ has
been printed in Gaelic eleven times, and _The Book of Common Prayer_
eight times, and Prayers from it once.

Of English religious writers who have captivated the Highland emotions,
Bunyan takes first place with his _Pilgrim’s Progress_, eleven editions;
_Death of Mr. Badman_, one edition; _The Barren Fig-tree_, one; _The
World to Come_, seven; _Visions of Heaven and Hell_, four; _Heavenly
Footman_, three; _Water of Life_, five; _Holy War_, two; _Come and
Welcome_, four; _Grace Abounding_, three.

Then Baxter’s _Call to the Unconverted_ went through nine editions, and
his _Saints’ Rest_, seven. Alleine, Boston, Doddridge, Dyer, Jonathan
Edwards were also prime favourites, whose works were represented by many
editions, especially _The Sinner’s Alarm_, _The Fourfold State_, _The
Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul_, _Christ’s Famous Titles_,
and _Doomed Sinners_.

Though the Gaelic-reading Highlanders had apparently little appetite for
general English literature in their own tongue outside works of
religion, they had a surprising avidity for hymns, elegies, and sermons,
for books on the Church, Christian doctrine, Baptism and the Sacraments.
And we meet with such varied titles as _Voluntaryism Indefensible_,
_Christ is All_, _Apples of Gold_, _Village Sermons_, _Letters to
Sinners_, _The Unspeakable Gift_, _Fame of the Branch_, _The Rose of
Sharon_, _Call to Awaken_, _Salvation by Grace_, _Sacramental
Exercises_, _The Believer’s Hope_, _A Parting Exhortation_, _Blair’s
Sermons_, _Token for Mourners_, _On the Guidance of the Holy Spirit_,
_Short History of the Baptists_, _Lessons on the Sabbath_, _The
Declaratory Act_, _A Word of Warning to the People_, _Assurance of
Salvation_.

Topics of this kind abound. They formed the favourite pabulum of the
more pious of our countrymen, and to this day some of these or similar
theological productions may be found in almost every Gaelic household of
the North and West Highlands.

While English printing concerned itself first with such works as _The
Game and Playe of the Chesse_, _The Dictes and Sayings of Philosophers_,
_The Æneid of Virgil_, _The Poems of Chaucer_, _Lydgate and Gower_, _The
Golden Legend_, and the _Morte d’Arthur_, Gaelic printing took to do
with religion. Knox’s Liturgy, Catechisms, Psalters, and Vocabularies
were its main concern; and only after the lapse of nearly two hundred
years did it give any attention to poetry or native literature of any
kind. The original bards, like all other English and foreign writers,
had to wait in the outer court of the Gentiles. But after Baxter’s _Call
to the Unconverted_ was issued in 1750 they began to come straggling in,
Mackellar with his hymns and Macdonald with his songs. And in addition
to Dugald Buchanan’s and Macintyre’s we have, during the following half
century, these books:—

A volume of Hymns published in 1770 by Macfadyen, a Glasgow University
student; and about the same time an Elegy and one or two other Gaelic
poems by another Glasgow student. Ronald Macdonald, son of Alexander,
published the first issue of old Gaelic poems, including some of his own
and his father’s, in 1776. Then followed in 1777 an anonymous collection
of Mirthful Songs, and in 1780 another of Curious ones; and a volume
entitled _Loudin’s Songs_.

John Brown’s, Margaret Cameron’s, and A. Campbell’s appeared in 1785;
and next year the better known collections of John Gillies, bookseller,
Perth, and Duncan Kennedy, schoolmaster, Kilmelford.

In 1787 Dr. Smith published his alleged poems of Ossian, Orran, Ullin,
etc., and those entitled _Dargo and Gaul_. And before the century closed
Kenneth Mackenzie’s, Alexander Macpherson’s, Duncan Campbell’s, and
Allan Macdougall’s compositions were all in type, issued separately.

The subsequent years, from 1800 to 1831, were most prolific in the
output of poetical publications. It seemed as if the Highland bards had
made a rival rush for the printing presses, and kept the busy machines
clicking. Among the names of those whose poems were then issued occur
the following: Dr. Dewar, Rob. Donn, William Gordon, George Ross Gordon,
Peter Grant, Angus Kennedy, A. and J. Maccallum, J. Macdonald, John
Macgregor, Dr. James Macgregor, P. Macfarlane, D. Macintosh, A. Mackay,
J. Maclachlan, J. Maclean, D. Macleod, D. Matheson, J. Morrison, James
Munro, A. and D. Stewart, R. Stewart, P. Stuart, P. Turner. And in
addition to theirs, and some other ten volumes of anonymous poetry,
partly original and partly collected, there were published within that
period the Highland Society’s edition of Ossian’s poems, and its
reprint, the one in London, 3 volumes, 1807, the other in Edinburgh,
1818.

If the Gaelic muse was at first slow in committing its productions to
modern printing, it appears to have cast off all reserve after 1800, and
every type of bardic effusion went to the press.

But of all the bards whose poems were appearing then, undoubtedly the
most popular was Dugald Buchanan. No other book in Gaelic, if we except
the Shorter Catechism and Psalter, has gone through so many editions as
his Hymns. In the comparatively short period of 110 years from their
first appearance they have been issued from the press forty times—so
great has been the demand for these vivid and impressive products of
Gaelic genius.

Next in general vogue to Buchanan’s comes Peter Grant’s _Spiritual
Hymns_, a book which has been printed at least nineteen times.

These three instances alone—the Psalter, Dugald Buchanan’s and Peter
Grant’s Hymns—would indicate that this is the type of literature that
has gone highest with the Gael, even if we did not observe how
frequently volumes of spiritual hymns occur in the list of printed
books.

By comparison such a classic as Alexander Macdonald’s _Gaelic Songs_ has
only reached eight editions, Duncan Ban Macintyre’s ten, and Rob Donn’s
three.

And this bias, so unmistakably exhibited by the Gaelic printed
literature, is not confined to poetry, but may be traced even in the few
original prose works that the language possesses.

Only ten such books appeared during the early decades of the nineteenth
century, and they are all religious ones of quite indifferent merit.
While of forty-five prose translations which were printed, either
through the munificence of private individuals, or as booksellers’
ventures, forty-two were of a religious and three of a moral kind.

There can be no doubt that this extraordinary preponderance of the
religious over every other type of printed literature in the Gaelic
list, has exercised its own baneful influence on the Highland character
of last century, leaving it lop-sided in some obvious directions and
rendering the Gael blind to the wider issues of life, and therefore more
or less impervious to new ideas. We can well understand his limitations,
if, ignorant of English or other modern languages, he were confined to
the books of his native tongue, as many Highlanders of the past
generations were. These books absolutely give him no knowledge of
science, philosophy, art, or even of the great literatures of the world.
And his own poets occupied, as we have seen, a somewhat subordinate
place in his list. Taught to look through one particular medium, and
deprived of most other means of vision, the unsuspecting Gael grew up
almost entirely oblivious of the march of mind, and for the most part
ignorant of the thoughts that shake mankind.

It is through the introduction of English, therefore, that he has been
getting emancipated of late years from the narrow outlook which his own
ill-chosen and limited printed literature affords. And it is the sudden
intrusion of this higher knowledge, rendering many of his theories
obsolete, which has so painfully convulsed the older generation of
Gaelic-speaking Highlanders in recent times, and left them so ill at
ease.

Though printing made its first inroad on the Gaelic language as early as
1567, it is characteristic of the race that the cream of the literature
only found type within the nineteenth century. After the early editions
of Ossian, Peter Grant, and Rob Donn, the following may be quoted as the
most noteworthy literary books that have appeared in the last hundred
years from the Highlands, namely: Dr. Norman Macleod’s _Caraid nan
Gaidheal_; Mackenzie’s _Beauties of Gaelic Poetry_, 1841; Campbell’s
_West Highland Tales_, 1860–62; Dr. Clerk’s _Ossian_, 1870; Campbell’s
_Leabhar na Feinne_, 1872; Sinclair’s _Oranaiche_, 1876–79; Nicolson’s
_Gaelic Proverbs_, 1882; Henry Whyte’s _Celtic Garland_, 1880–81;
_Celtic Lyre_, 1883–95; Mary Mackellar’s _Poems and Songs_, 1881; Neil
Macleod’s _Clarsach an Doire_, 1883; Dr. Cameron’s _Reliquiæ Celticæ_,
1892–94; Dr. Nigel Macneill’s _The Literature of the Highlanders_, 1892;
and Alexander Carmichael’s _Carmina Gadelica_, 1900.

In addition to the purely literary works, there are three other classes
of Gaelic books, intimately associated with the history of the language,
which have received considerable attention from the printer, and which
are worthy of our notice here. These are School-books, Grammars, and
Dictionaries.

Of school-books there were three series that ran through many editions
during the first half of last century, namely, the Gaelic Society’s
School series, the Society for Propagating Christian Knowledge series,
and the General Assembly’s series. Besides ordinary class books,
portions of Scripture, especially from Proverbs, Psalms, Job, and the
Gospels were printed for use as reading books in schools. The first of
the above series dates from 1811, the second from 1815, and the third
from 1826.

John Reid apparently never heard of Fenius Farsaid or the “Uraicept na
n-Éigeas,”[35] or of the other MS. fragments, for he has the following
interesting modern account of Gaelic Grammars.

“The first attempt that we have on record of a Celtic Grammar was one
written by Florence Gray, a monk who was born in Humond about the end of
the sixteenth or the beginning of the seventeenth century; but we have
never been able to find a copy of it, or ascertain if it was printed. It
is probable that if it was printed it appeared about 1620, as we know
that he was living in Dublin in 1630.

“In 1639 Tobias Stapleton, an Irish priest, published at Louvain a small
quarto Catechism for the use of the Irish students on the Continent, in
parallel columns, Latin and English. To the end of the Catechism is
added a small tract in Latin and Irish, entitled, ‘Modus perutilis
legendi linguam Hibernicam.’

“After this there appeared various little imperfect compends of Irish
Grammar, but nothing of any real value until 1677, when there appeared
at Rome Molloy’s _Grammatica Latino-Hibernica Compendiata_, which,
although deficient in syntax and other important requisites, was
decidedly the most important work on the subject until 1728, when Hugh
M‘Cuirtin published his _Elements of the Irish Language_,[36] which
again appeared enlarged in his Dictionary, published in 1732.

“In 1742, Donlevy published at Paris a Catechism in Irish and English,
to which he appended ‘The Elements of the Irish Language.’ This has been
followed by the Irish Grammars of General Vallancy, Dr. William Neilson,
Dr. Paul O’Bryan, William Halliday, and one or two anonymous
authors.[37] It is said by Lhuyd, in the year 1707, that a Scottish
gentleman had then some thoughts of publishing a Scottish Gaelic
Grammar; but the earliest attempt known to us is by Malcolm, who, about
the year 1736, published _Some Elements of the Ancient Scottish, or
Caledonian Celtick, with some Observations_. In the year 1778 Shaw’s
work appeared, with the following title: _An Analysis of the Gaelic
Language, by William Shaw, A.M., Forsan et haec olim meminisse juvabit.
Virg., Edin._, 1778.”

A second edition followed the same year, the published price of the book
being 4s. sewed. It is now very rare, but not of much account.

The next work of the kind to appear was Stewart’s, announced as follows:
“Elements of Gaelic Grammar, in four parts. I. Of Pronunciation and
Orthography. II. Of the Parts of Speech. III. Of Syntax. IV. Of
Derivation and Composition. By Alexander Stewart, Minister of the Gospel
at Dingwall, Honorary Member of The Highland Society of Scotland,
Edinburgh. Printed by C. Stewart & Coy.; for Peter Hill, Edinburgh; and
Vernon and Hood, London, 1801.”

A second edition, corrected and enlarged, was issued in 1812, a third in
1876, and a fourth in 1879. It is very much superior to that by Shaw,
and is still the best and the one in common use.

A smaller volume appeared in 1828, entitled, _The Principles of Gaelic
Grammar, designed to facilitate the study of that language to youth_, by
Archibald Currie, formerly Master of the Grammar School, Rothesay, but
at the time of publication Tutor at Prospect, Duntroon, Argyllshire. It
has never been reprinted. After him Neil Macalpine, of Dictionary fame,
produced one which went through four editions. The other grammarians
have been Munro, 1835–43; Forbes, 1843–48; Dr. Macgillivray, 1858; L.
Macbean; D. C. Macpherson, 1891; Malcolm Macfarlane, for the Highland
Association, 1893; Reid, 1895; and Gillies, 1896, the latter based on
Stewart’s.

A good Grammar of the Gaelic language is still a desideratum. Students
feel that those already in existence follow too slavishly the model of
grammars of other tongues, from which the Gaelic diverges, and thus
exceptions to the rules abound. Only a man of the Zeuss type, well
versed in philology and the original structure and peculiar idioms of
this ancient speech, would be likely to bring order out of the existing
chaos, and produce a book which would be a real help to the study of the
language. Meanwhile the student has to fall back upon Stewart, whose
outlines were put together when philological research was yet in its
infancy. Though Zeuss and Windisch have Gaelic Grammars, they are in
Latin and German.

The history of the Dictionaries is even more interesting. Michael
O’Clery is credited with the first attempts to produce a Gaelic one.[38]
His _Seanasan Nuadh_, or glossary of old words, was published at Louvain
in 1643. Other Irish lexicographers followed, as many as six
Dictionaries appearing before the year 1817 was ended, among them that
of the learned Lhuyd of Wales and Oxford in 1706.

The earliest in the Scottish Gaelic, was Kirke’s Vocabulary, printed at
the end of the Irish Bible in 1690, and consisting of five and a half
pages, on which the words were arranged alphabetically. Later, in 1702,
another Vocabulary of thirteen pages by him, including additions by
Lhuyd, was published in _Nicholson’s Scottish Historical Library_. This
one is not arranged alphabetically, but under twelve heads or divisions.
Neither of Kirke’s was issued by itself, apart from other
subject-matter.

Afterwards, about the year 1732, the Rev. Dr. Malcolm or M‘Colm of
Duddingston made an attempt to compile a lexicon, the material for which
was said to have been prepared by Lhuyd. He published a prospectus and a
specimen of the work, entitled “Focloir Gaoidheilge-Shagsonach,” but
although he was encouraged by the General Assembly and received a grant
of £20, the work never appeared.

Thus the first Gaelic Dictionary published in separate form was
Macdonald’s Vocabulary, 1741, written for the use of the Charity Schools
founded and endowed in the Highlands by the Society for Propagating
Christian Knowledge. Like its predecessor, it is not arranged
alphabetically but divided into subjects or chapters, like the
syllabaries used by the ancient Assyrians.

A more ambitious work was “A Galic and English Dictionary, containing
all the words in the Scottish and Irish dialects of the Celtic that
could be collated from the voice, and old books, and MSS., by the Rev.
William Shaw, A.M., followed by an English and Galic Dictionary,
containing the most useful and necessary words in the English language,
explained by the correspondent words in the Galic,” by the same author,
1780. The published price was two guineas, though it was frequently sold
for three and a half. Shaw’s knowledge of the language was defective. A
most furious Highland storm burst over his head on account of his open
championship of the Johnsonian side in the Ossianic controversy.
Consequently some of the subscribers returned their copies, but on the
plea that there were a good many Irish words in the book. Others, who
did not return them within a reasonable time, were found liable to pay.
The case had gone to the Court of Session, and the author won, the
judges finding that though he did not fulfil the terms of his prospectus
he was not guilty of fraud or deceit in the preparation of the book, and
when a definition of a Gaelic Dictionary was given they held that his
legally answered the description. From Shaw himself the curious fact was
elicited that, when picking up words among the Highlanders, he found the
task nearly impossible, as he had to pay them all except the most
educated, the natives being impressed with the idea that he was going to
make a fortune out of the language, and of course they should have a
share. In consequence he turned to the Irish peasantry, who received him
more graciously; and he had access to Colonel Vallancy’s MSS. But the
upshot was that the Dictionary did ultimately contain more Irish words
than Gaelic. And this, combined with his own unpopularity, gave his
controversial foes the opportunity to thwart him, which he resisted, as
we have indicated, by litigation. Ultimately he had to seek refuge in
the Church of England, where through the influence, it is supposed, of
Dr. Johnson, he got a living worth £200 a year.

“A new Alphabetical Vocabulary, Gaelic and English, with some directions
_for writing and reading_ the Gaelic,” by Robert Macfarlane, Edinburgh,
appeared in 1795; and in 1815 another, in two parts, by Peter
Macfarlane, the Gaelic translator of Bunyan’s _Pilgrim’s Progress_,
Doddridge’s _Rise and Progress_, and Blair’s _Sermons_. The two parts
were also published separately in the same year. This was the only
really practical Gaelic Dictionary up to date, but on account of its
limited size was still very deficient

A prospectus for a more comprehensive lexicon was issued in 1803 by
Alexander Robertson, schoolmaster, Kirkmichael, and a few parts
appeared. Thereafter the Highland Society bought his MS., as an aid to
the Dictionary contemplated by themselves.

Since then there have been issued as many as five good ones, all more or
less well known and serviceable at the present time. The first of these
was by Rev. A. Armstrong, A.M., “in which the words in their different
acceptations are illustrated by quotations from the best Gaelic writers;
and their affinities traced in most of the languages of ancient and
modern times, with a short historical appendix of ancient names deduced
from the authority of Ossian and other poets; to which is prefixed a new
Gaelic Grammar, 1825.” The work was published at three guineas.

On the other hand, the rival, issued by the Highland Society of
Scotland, three years later, on somewhat similar lines, cost seven
guineas in demy quarto, and ten in royal. To an advertisement from the
publisher the following is attached: “This great work has occupied the
attention of the Society since 1814, and presents not only a fully
illustrated view of the Gaelic of Scotland, but surpasses in extent any
lexicon of the Celtic Language ever offered to the public in this or any
other country.” Armstrong’s and this one are by far the largest and the
best.

Next in order comes that projected by the Rev. Dr. Norman Macleod,
Minister of Campsie, and the Rev. Dr. Daniel Dewar of Glasgow, 1831. It
was superintended through the press and indeed mainly compiled by the
Peter Macfarlane already mentioned and his son Donald—both accredited
Gaelic scholars; and sold for a guinea. It is now known as Macleod and
Dewar’s.

Contemporary with it we may say, there appeared, in 1832, the first
attempt at a Gaelic pronouncing Dictionary, sold in parts by all the
teachers in the Highlands. It was originally issued as “A Pocket
Pronouncing Gaelic Dictionary for Schools in the Highlands and Islands”;
containing a far greater number of pure Gaelic words than any other
Dictionary, and three times, in some instances ten times, the number of
illustrations and examples in the large Gaelic Dictionaries, from the
Bible and other sources; also all words that are exclusively Irish
pointed out, and reasons given for rejecting them by N. Macalpine,
student in Divinity and Parochial Schoolmaster in Islay.

While Armstrong’s and the Highland Society’s Dictionary have only had
one edition, and Macleod and Dewar’s five, Macalpine’s has reached as
many as twelve, and was last printed in 1890. A small volume of
recognised merit by the Rev. Ewen Maceachen bears the date 1842. It has
now been re-edited by Dr. Macbain and Mr. John Whyte.

Lately Dr. Macbain’s own _Etymological Dictionary_, the most scholarly
work of the kind, has been published at Inverness in 1896, of which
interesting book a new edition may shortly be expected, so that Highland
Vernacular Dictionaries have had a goodly record.

One other department of this study remains to be noted, namely the
periodicals, a mere list of which suffices to show their character and
history. But indirectly this list throws a pathetic sidelight on the
waning fortunes, or may we not say, the expiring struggles of our
ancient tongue, as well as upon the number and variety of efforts that
have been put forth to resuscitate it.

                               PERIODICALS
 ┌──────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────┬───────┬────────┐
 │            Name.             │       Place.        │ Date. │  Nos.  │
 ├──────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────┼───────┼────────┤
 │Ros-Roine (The Rose of the    │Glasgow              │1803   │       4│
 │  Field)                      │                     │       │        │
 │An Teachdaire Gaidhealach     │          „          │1829–31│      24│
 │  (Highland Messenger)        │                     │       │        │
 │An Teachdaire Ur Gaidhealach  │          „          │1835–36│       9│
 │  (New Messenger)             │                     │       │        │
 │Cuairtear nan Gleann          │          „          │1840–43│      40│
 │An Cuairtear Og Gaidhealach   │Antigonish           │1851   │      13│
 │Cuairtear nan Coillte         │Ontario              │1840   │        │
 │Teachdaire Gaidhealach        │Antigonish           │1837   │        │
 │  Thasmania                   │                     │       │        │
 │An Fhianuis (The Witness)     │Glasgow              │1845–50│      36│
 │Eaglais Shaor na h’Alba       │          „          │1875–93│      74│
 │  (Quarterly)                 │                     │       │        │
 │An Fhianuis (Continuation of  │          „          │1893–  │        │
 │  above)                      │                     │       │        │
 │A Bheithir Bheuma (The        │          „          │1845   │        │
 │  Satirist, No. 1)            │                     │       │        │
 │Teachdaire nan Gaidheal       │          „          │1844   │       8│
 │Caraid nan Gael               │          „          │1844   │       5│
 │Caraid nan Gaidheal (No. 1)   │Inverness            │1853   │        │
 │Fear Tathaich (The Mountain   │Glasgow              │1848–50│      25│
 │  Visitor)                    │                     │       │        │
 │An T-Aoidh Miosail            │Edinburgh            │1847–48│      17│
 │An Gaidheal (The Gael)        │Toronto              │1871–77│ 6 vols.│
 │  Issued afresh               │Glasgow and Edinburgh│       │        │
 │Monthly Visitor               │          „          │1858–  │        │
 │The Celtic Magazine           │Inverness            │1876–88│13 vols.│
 │The Highland Magazine         │Oban                 │1885   │       8│
 │The Banner of Truth           │Glasgow              │1872–74│ 2 vols.│
 │The Highland Monthly          │Inverness            │1889   │      51│
 │Cuairtear na Coille           │          „          │1881   │        │
 │MacTalla                      │Sydney, Cape Breton  │1892   │        │
 │Supplement to _Life and Work_ │Glasgow              │1879–  │        │
 │Scottish Celtic Review        │          „          │1881–85│       4│
 │The Celtic Monthly            │          „          │1892–  │        │
 └──────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────┴───────┴────────┘

Of these it will be seen the most died in their infancy. The only
survivors in Scotland to-day are the Church Quarterly _An Fhianuis_, the
Monthly Supplement to _Life and Work_, and the _Celtic Monthly_. There
have been about twenty monthly periodicals tried since the beginning of
last century. Of the _Gaelic Messenger_, to take a single example, Dr.
Nigel Macneill says that the late Mr. W. R. Macphun, the publisher,
informed him in 1873 that the parcels of _Messengers_ sent to the
Highlands and Islands came back at the end of the year, _after they had
been read_, without any accompanying payment. Dr. Macleod, the editor,
and his enterprising publisher saw then that it was time to give up the
business. “Some who have lost time and money in recent times over Gaelic
affairs,” adds Dr. Macneill sententiously, “may find some cold comfort
in this incident in the experience of our greatest of prose writers.”

Further comment on that score is surely unnecessary. Yet is it not
suggestive of much that the only paper at present wholly written in
Scottish Gaelic is one published in Cape Breton, 3000 miles without and
beyond the Celtic fringe of the Old World?

Taken as a whole, we may see from this survey that the printed Gaelic
books extant belong to the past. They represent a type of thought which
has been largely superseded. And no modern outside the world of Gaelic
dream could live and thrive on them exclusively. Nevertheless they
represent the literature of a people, ancient and venerable, and as such
they will have a value and interest for the future historian,
litterateur, philologist, and ethnologist far exceeding what they have
to-day; and in translations the best of the bards will be read when the
language in which they breathed their poetry is no longer heard on the
lips of men.




                             CHAPTER XVIII
                  THE MASTER GLEANERS OF GAELIC POETRY

  The work of the gleaner—Authors of the three most precious relics of
      Celtic literature, Leabhar Na h’Uidhre, Book of Hymns, and Book of
      Leinster—of the three Highland treasures, Book of the Dean of
      Lismore, Fernaig MS., and Book of Clanranald—Advent of
      Macpherson—Collections and collectors between 1750 and 1820—First
      printed gleaning—Four nineteenth-century monuments, Campbell’s
      Leabhar na Feinne, Mackenzie’s Beauties of Gaelic Poetry,
      Sinclair’s Songster, and Carmichael’s Carmina Gadelica—Other
      recent gleaners and their books.


To the gleaners of the poetic heritage of the past we are indebted
almost as much as to the poets themselves; for what mattered it to us
that some Homer or Ossian had sung, if none of their contributions ever
reached us? An unappreciative age may allow its masterpieces to be lost,
but the gleaners will not suffer that. They treasure the best, many a
time snatching the fugitive poems from the verge of oblivion.

Sometimes they glean for the pure pleasure of possessing, as the miser
amasses his gold. Often they do it to share with others. In any case,
like the middlemen of commerce, they are the true distributers, for
sooner or later their wares reach the market.

Unlike that of the poet, the work of the gleaner demands no originality;
only a certain devotion and enthusiasm for the compositions admired, and
a certain critical judgment, the latter not always in evidence, and not
necessarily indispensable. Posterity does the winnowing.

To the gleaners we owe the original compiling of the three most precious
relics of Celtic literature now in the world—the Leabhar Na h’Uidhre,
the Book of Hymns, and the Book of Leinster.

It is away back in the latter end of the eleventh century and early part
of the twelfth that we encounter the authors of these. When the gloom of
the Middle Ages was settling down upon Europe, and weird apparitions
hovered round the camp fires and the cloisters; when the feudal lords
were building their strong castles and the men of peace their churches
and monastic retreats, to escape from war and disorder and general
wickedness, one might enter the precincts of the great monastery of
Clonmacnois in Ireland and find Maelmuiri, the son of the son of Conn
nam Bocht, busy with his pen compiling the Leabhar Na h’Uidhre. Many
times already had the sacred edifice been attacked and pillaged by the
marauding Norsemen, and even then it was surrounded by people rendered
violent and half savage by the disorders of the time, so that the
studious Maelmuiri with his literary tastes was not secure in his quiet
retreat, but in the midst of his peaceful avocations was set upon one
night in the church and murdered by a band of robbers, to whom
literature, most likely, had no meaning.

But Maelmuiri had already reared his monument, more lasting than brass,
in the book which happily escaped the hands of the ruffians.

It is the oldest miscellaneous gleaning we have, and contains, among
many valuable productions in prose and poetry, such ancient poems as
Dallan Forgaill’s “Amra” or “Praise of Columcille,” and a pretty large
transcript of the “Táin Bó Chuailgné.” The Gaelic of the former in the
Fenian dialect was so ancient even in Maelmuiri’s time that it had to be
heavily glossed and commented upon.

Of his contemporary, the compiler of the Book of Hymns, nothing seems to
be known. His monument too has survived the ravages and vicissitudes of
time, but without his name. A wonderful anthology it is, carrying us
back, as in the case of the other, to the days of St Columba, and even
further, to the period of St. Patrick. For here, in the _Liber
Hymnorum_, we have the Gaelic hymns of Patrick, Colmán, Fiacc, Ultán,
Broccán, Sanctáin, Dallan Forgaill, Máel-ísu, the prayers of Níníne and
Adamnan; a Quatrain on the Apostles; besides a variety of beautiful
Latin hymns with Gaelic glosses and prefaces. Among the more famous of
the latter may be mentioned the “Te Deum,” the “Magnificat,” the “Gloria
in Excelsis Deo,” and the “Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel,” so well
known to worshippers throughout the ages since then; and the three Latin
hymns of St. Columba—the “Altus,” “In te Christo,” and “Noli Pater.”

Many of these occur only in the Book of Hymns, except when copied from
it elsewhere, and may have been lost to posterity, but for the industry
of the unknown gleaner now no more remembered.

Maelmuiri and he, in all probability had made their collection before
the close of the eleventh century; and fifty years later appeared the
compiler,[39] who produced the Book of Leinster, containing no less than
187 romances in prose and poetry. After the Leabhar Na h’Uidhre this is
reckoned the most important monument of Gaelic literature.

The stories recorded relate to events which for the most part happened
before the year 650, and their interest and variety may be inferred from
the following category of subjects, into which they have been
classified, namely: destructions of fortified places, cow-spoils,
courtships, battles, cave-stories, voyagings, tragic deaths, feasts,
sieges, adventures, elopements, slaughters, water-eruptions,
expeditions, progresses, and visions. A book of old-time and abundant
human incident is this middle-age document.

In succession to these three master-gleaners there arose numerous other
less famous ones in Ireland.

But our special quest carries us over from this time to the land famed
in later song and story as the home of the Gaelic tongue. And coming to
Scotland three other monuments of Celtic industry and literary taste
arise to view, covering the period extending from the fourteenth century
to the Forty-five. They are the Book of the Dean of Lismore, the Fernaig
MS., and the Book of Clanranald. These having been described in detail
in Chapter VII., demand no more than a passing reference here. Happily,
more is known of their authors than of the compilers of their famous
precursors.

It was in that wild and turbulent period of clan feuds in the Northern
and Western Highlands, and family quarrels between the Douglases and
their rivals in the Lowlands, almost half a century before the Scottish
Reformation, that the Dean of Lismore in his island home near Oban, set
about collecting his fund of Gaelic poetry. In 1512, just the year
before Flodden, he began to write down what he gleaned from oral
recitation throughout the Highlands and Ireland, and continued with the
help of his brother down to the year 1526, thus conserving not only the
poetry of his own generation and of two previous centuries, but also
most beautiful and characteristic fragments of Ossianic poems, some of
which, but for him, would have been irretrievably lost.

A hundred and sixty years pass stormfully by before we meet the next
gleaner in this field of poetic literature. And then arose among the
wild Macraes of Kintail the chief of that name, Donnachadh nam Piòs,
full of piety and song. Amid the tumults of the Revolution of 1688,
while Claverhouse was leading the clans on to fateful Killiecrankie, and
Cannon and Buchan were ravaging the Northern Highlands, this friend of
the Muses, and learned chieftain, found a pastime in making of verse and
committing to manuscript, thousands of lines of poetry current in his
own district, from Carsewell’s day down to his own, and in point of
place from Southern Argyllshire north to the borders of Caithness.

This representative gleaning carries the bardic succession over the long
interval since the Dean’s time, and it is a pity that though the Fernaig
manuscript has been transcribed and annotated by Professor Mackinnon,
and again transcribed by Dr. Cameron and Dr. Macbain, and partly
transliterated by Dr. Henderson, no English rendering has yet been
published.

The poems in the Book of Clanranald are not of the same high order as
the earlier survivals, with the exception of the two or three Ossianic
fragments, which are likewise to be found elsewhere. But they supplement
the Fernaig collection, and help to bring down the poetic tradition
nearer the Forty-five. It is to the Macvurichs—the descendants of
Muireach Albanach, and the hereditary bards of Clanranald—that we owe
this contribution to the gleanings of poetising in by-gone days. They
collected throughout their successive generations chiefly elegies and
eulogies, from the time of Charles the First to George the Second.

A new era of enthusiasm for bardic compositions opened with the advent
of Macpherson and his publication in June 1760 of “Fragments of Ancient
Poetry collected in the Highlands of Scotland.” The rich field of Celtic
lore in the past was by this time almost unknown. Few interested
themselves in the Celtic literature of their country. The Book of the
Dean of Lismore lay in obscurity, nobody now knows where. For centuries
it had never been heard of. The Fernaig MS. and the Book of Clanranald
were equally buried, perhaps in old clan chests or lumber-rooms. No
better evidence of the great dearth in the land of master-gleaners could
be adduced than the challenge of Dr. Johnson, that there were not in the
whole world Gaelic MSS. one hundred years old, and the feeble way in
which it was met.

Interest in these days had reached a very low ebb indeed, when the
controversy over Macpherson’s _Ossian_ set the Celts a-searching.

Macpherson himself, first in the field of these newly awakened
enthusiasts, is believed, in the course of his journey through the
North-West Highlands, to have gleaned the best of what remained of the
treasure. But for him it is highly probable there would be no Scottish
collection of Gaelic MSS. in the Advocates’ Library to-day. Many of them
were already on their way to decay, as their tattered appearance shows.

Besides the work of the Highland Society and the stock in hand of the
Kilbride family, it is quite remarkable the number of minor collections
that were made between the years 1750 and 1820. This period was, in
fact, a resurrected Ossianic cycle. It would be tedious, and quite
unnecessary here to catalogue all the names, but we may mention the
Turner, the Jerome Stone, the Macnicol, the Fletcher, the Campbell, the
Gillies, the Irvine, the Macpherson, the Kennedy, the Sir George
Mackenzie, the Sinclair, the Sage, the Macfarlane, the Grant, and the
Maccallum collections. And among these gleaners, the baronet, the
clergy, the teacher, the farmer, the printer, the soldier, the advocate,
the traveller, are all represented.

It is curious now, looking back on the great Macpherson Ossianic
controversy, which called forth all this industry, this laborious
writing and research, to reflect on its rise and progress. Doubtless it
was felt then, as it is recognised now, that the only real way to solve
the riddle was to glean in the fields of poetry and history—a task prior
to that period too much neglected. They wanted data. Had they the
records we now possess, and had they been able to read the ancient
scrolls, there would have been no literary wrangle. How quietly and
naturally the question, then a problem, has with the advent of
scientific scholarship solved itself. As a controversy the Macpherson
squabble is now as extinct as the dodo. And the Celtic champions who
heralded the dawn of last century, as we did of this, would perhaps be
almost as much taken aback with the issue could they know, as with the
wonders of steam or electricity and the camera.

It is an interesting fact that the earliest to achieve a printed
collection of ancient Gaelic poetry was Ronald Macdonald, son of the
Ardnamurchan bard, who published a volume in 1776, presumably from
materials treasured by his father.

But if through the past centuries the master gleaners appeared only at
rare intervals, the nineteenth has not been thus barren. For almost
simultaneously with the Celtic renaissance abroad, enthusiastic
harvesters entered the field at home. Four works especially, all
produced within the last sixty years, call for particular attention.
Following the modern method, their authors have each taken up a special
line, ransacking the past and the present for their own peculiar pearls.
And thus for the first time the whole Scottish field of Gaelic poetry
has been well-nigh gone over, and representative poems of every age and
class have been gleaned and printed.

First in the order of the antiquity of its contents, though not first in
the field, comes Campbell’s _Leabhar na Feinne_. It appeared in 1872,
its title page announcement sufficiently indicating its aim and scope.
As a sub-title, the latter runs as follows:—

                       “Heroic Gaelic Ballads
                           Collected in Scotland
                       Chiefly from 1512 to 1871

copied from old manuscripts preserved at Edinburgh and elsewhere, and
from rare books; and orally collected since 1859; with lists of
collections and of their contents; and with a short account of the
documents quoted.

             Arranged by
                   J. F. Campbell,
                     Niddry Lodge, Kensington, London, W.”

The author, who was a barrister, and of an ancient and illustrious
Highland family in Islay, spent twelve years from 1859 collecting
folk-lore and poetry as opportunity offered throughout the Highlands, a
work in which he was assisted by various contributors and coadjutors.
His first book, entitled _Popular Tales of the West Highlands_, orally
collected, was published in Edinburgh in 1862. There are four volumes,
and they contain mainly prose stories, such as were wont to be repeated
round the firesides in the Highland Ceilidh in days of yore. Yet,
commingled with the Sgeulachdan, are to be found Ossianic fragments
which had filtered down by oral tradition.

This publication, however, was but a stepping-stone to the author’s real
_magnum opus_, the _Leabhar na Feinne_.

For it, he collected about 54,000 lines of heroic poetry, and these it
will be observed are independent of the Irish MSS., and almost of the
Scottish MSS. written in the Irish character before the year 1512. With
regard to the latter he says, “To publish them is more than I am able to
do. Where extracts have been made I have quoted a few passages to show
what the language is like, and how these ancient writings correspond to
later writings.”

Since in many cases he had two or more versions of the same ballad, and
in some cases five or six, it was his original intention to collate and
make one perfect copy. This idea he had ultimately to abandon, and
wisely followed the plan of printing the oldest, with selections from
later versions. Of the first Ossianic fragment he attempted to collate
from two versions, namely, Garbh Mac Stairn, he says, “not a line of
Macpherson’s Gaelic was in either version, but the story seemed to be
the foundation of the first book of Fingal, and therefore a literary
curiosity.” It is significant that when Campbell issued his first book
he favoured the authenticity of Macpherson’s _Ossian_, but by the time
_Leabhar na Feinne_ appeared he was strong the other way. His early
attitude he attributed to “unformed opinions affected by old beliefs.”

The ballads of _Leabhar na Feinne_ are arranged under nine heads,
according to their chronological sequence, as follows:—

    I. The Story of Cuchulinn.

   II. The Story of Deirdre.

  III. The Story of Fraoch.

   IV. The Story of Fionn and the Feinn, including the Norse Ballads.

    V. Parodies.

   VI. Later Heroic Ballads.

  VII. Mythical Ballads.

 VIII. Poems like Macpherson’s _Ossian_.

   IX. Pope’s collection of ten Ballads.

These heroic tales read like the _Arabian Nights_, often with the
exaggerated fancy of _Don Quixote_. The extraordinary variety and human
interest of the ballads may be gleaned even from their names. For
example: The Story of Cuchulinn and Eimer, his wife; his sword; his
chariots; Garbh Mac Stairn; and Conlaoch; and Connal’s revenge. The
Story of Fionn and his Feinn; his pedigree; stories about his birth;
Ossian and Padruig; Ossian’s last hunt; how he got his sight; the loss
of the Fenian history; Ossian’s controversy with Padruig; his lament for
his comrades; their names; their favourite music; how nine went forth to
seek a whelp. Caoilte; how he slew a magic boar and a giant.

The following would pass as the titles of chapters in the great classic
of Cervantes: The adventure with the timbrel player; With Silhalan; The
adventure of the hag; The stealing of Fionn’s cup; The adventure with
the enchanter’s family; Roc, the King’s one-legged runner; The smithy
song, how they got swords; The one-eyed giantess and her ships; The
battle with Manus; Fionn’s expedition to Lochlan; His puzzle; His
enchantment in the rowan booth; The adventure of the nine with a
horseman; The adventure in the house of the king of the fair strangers;
The Black Dog slain by Bran; The adventure of the six at the golden
castle; The tightest fight of the Feinn; The expedition of eight or of
the six to foreign lands; The distressed maiden; The battle of Fair
Strand, in which the Feinn defeated the whole world in arms; The maid of
the fair white garment; Ossian’s courting; How Bran was killed and
Gaul’s dog; Fionn’s encounter of wits with Ailbhe, Cormac’s daughter;
The elopement of Grainne, Fionn’s wife, with Diarmad, Fionn’s nephew;
Diarmad’s lament for his comrades; The story of Gaul Macmorna; his
adventure with Lamh-fhad; Gaul’s last words to his wife.

The parodies have these headings: The black wrapper; A dream; The tailor
and the Feinn; The truiseal stone; Diarmad’s speech.

Among later heroical ballads occur subjects like these: The lay of the
great fool; Oscar and the giant; Muirchadh Mac Brian and the heiress of
Dublin; Muirchadh Mac Brian’s riding dress; Hugh O’Neil’s horse.

Such sumptuous narrative, spiced with no lack of imaginative detail,
might satisfy even Chaucer’s merry group as they foregathered to listen
to the story-telling at the Tabard Inn centuries ago.

In 1841, some thirty years before _Leabhar na Feinne_, Mackenzie’s
_Beauties of Gaelic Poetry_ appeared. It is a work of more general
interest than the other, in so far that it gives gems of every type of
poem. Here are to be found in concise compass the best productions of
the best bards during the last 300 years, with brief biographical
sketches, critical and explanatory notes, and other elucidations.

John Mackenzie, the compiler, was born in 1806 of humble parentage in
Gairloch, Ross-shire. Educated in the parish school there, and
afterwards at Tain Academy, he developed a taste for reading and music,
and became very proficient in the making of musical instruments. His
father had him started in life as an apprentice joiner in Dingwall. This
occupation he soon left, however, for more congenial literary work, such
as the collecting of poetical material for publication. On leaving his
native strath to push his way in the great cities of the South, he acted
for a time as book-keeper in the Glasgow University printing office, and
in addition to compiling “The Beauties,” wrote much in prose. Afterwards
the late Gaelic publishers, Maclachlan and Stewart, Edinburgh, employed
him on various undertakings for several years. Besides “The Beauties” he
wrote a “History of Prince Charlie,” the English-Gaelic Dictionary,
usually bound with Macalpine’s, the “Gaelic Melodist,” and compiled,
wrote, translated, or edited under surprising difficulties, about thirty
other works.

A man of talent and industry, Mackenzie has produced a book which not
only enhances the prestige of our native literature, but also places
himself in the front rank of Gaelic gleaners.

Like the Dean of Lismore, however, he has inserted certain matters which
critics feel might, with advantage, be omitted, as they detract from the
dignity of the work as a whole.

On the other hand, the author of _Leabhar na Feinne_ feels aggrieved
that Mackenzie has not included among “The Beauties” some of the ancient
heroic ballads of Ossianic origin. As well might objection be taken to
Mr. Campbell himself for omitting the heroic poetry in the Irish MSS.
and the Scottish MSS. written in the old Gaelic script. As a matter of
fact, Mackenzie does give as samples three very beautiful pieces, the
“Mordubh,” “Collath,” and “The Aged Bard’s Wish,” which he took to be
ancient, but which are now held to belong to the Macpherson period.

Both compilers did well to follow each his own plan and work out his own
ideal. The field has thus been all the better harvested.

Mackenzie’s undertaking seems to have early undermined his health, and
though usually resident in the South, he died at Inverewe on the 19th
day of August 1848, among his own people, and was buried with his
fathers in the old chapel in the churchyard of Gairloch, near which, at
the roadside, a monument now stands to his memory.

A few specimen extracts from “The Beauties” may here be quoted to
illustrate their quality. Of the three earlier poems “The Aged Bard’s
Wish” is the best known, and of it our author gives both the text and a
literal translation. It was Mrs. Grant of Laggan who first brought it
under public notice, and then it was considered ancient because there is
no flavour of Christianity in its composition. On the contrary, the bard
desires entrance at death into the hall where dwell Ossian and Daol, and
expresses the wish that there be laid by his side at the last a harp, a
shell full of liquor, and his ancestor’s shield. In other respects both
the language and sentiment are modern.

           O càiraibh mi ri taobh nan allt
             A shiubhlas mall le ceumaibh ciuin
           Fo sgâil a bharraich leag mo cheann
             ’S bi thùs’ a ghrian ro-chàirdeil rium.

           O place me by the purling brook,
             That wimples gently down the lea,
           Under the old tree’s branchy shade,
             And thou, bright sun, be kind to me!

           Where I may hear the waterfall,
             And the hum of its falling wave,
           And give me the harp and the shell and the shield
             Of my sires in the strife of the brave.

Of Macintyre’s “Ben Dorain,” which is also included, Professor Blackie
says, “I shall be surprised to learn that there exists in any language,
ancient or modern, a more original poem of the genus which we may call
venatorial. What Landseer, in a sister art, has done for animals in
general, that Macintyre, in this singular work, has done for the deer
and the roe.” And then Blackie himself gives a characteristic rendering
into English of the poem, very free, but catching the spirit of its
Gaelic author. For example:—
